[Abstract, Methods, Results, Discussion]

Changing patterns of cancer incidence in the early- and late-HAART periods:
          the Swiss HIV Cohort Study. Background: The advent of highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) in 1996 led to a decrease in             the incidence of Kaposi's sarcoma (KS) and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL), but not of             other cancers, among people with HIV or AIDS (PWHA). It also led to marked increases in             their life expectancy.   Methods: We conducted a record-linkage study between the Swiss HIV Cohort Study and nine Swiss             cantonal cancer registries. In total, 9429 PWHA provided 20 615, 17 690,             and 15 410 person-years in the pre-, early-, and late-HAART periods,             respectively. Standardised incidence ratios in PWHA vs the general             population, as well as age-standardised, and age-specific incidence rates were computed             for different periods.   Results: Incidence of KS and NHL decreased by several fold between the pre- and early-HAART             periods, and additionally declined from the early- to the late-HAART period. Incidence             of cancers of the anus, liver, non-melanomatous skin, and Hodgkin's lymphoma increased             in the early- compared with the pre-HAART period, but not during the late-HAART period.             The incidence of all non-AIDS-defining cancers (NADCs) combined was similar in all             periods, and approximately double that in the general population.   Conclusions: Increases in the incidence of selected NADCs after the introduction of HAART were             largely accounted for by the ageing of PWHA.

Materials and methods
The SHCS has been enrolling PWHA who are >16 years of age from seven large
        hospitals in different Swiss cities (Basel, Bern, Geneva, Lausanne, Lugano, St Gallen, and
        Zurich) since 1988, with some retrospective enrolment going back to 1985 (The Swiss HIV Cohort Study, 2010). Once written
        informed consent is obtained, detailed information (including demographic and clinical
        characteristics) is collected. Follow-up visits are scheduled at 6-month intervals and
        include updating information on selected disease diagnoses, laboratory test results, and
        HIV/AIDS-related treatments. Only AIDS-defining cancers (KS, NHL, and, since 1993, invasive
        cervical carcinoma) (Ancelle-Park, 1993) and
        Hodgkin's lymphoma have been systematically reported in the SHCS since the beginning of the
        study.
Nine active cancer registries, covering 56% of the Swiss population, collect
        population-based quality-checked data on cancer incidence in Switzerland (Curado et al, 2007). The Cancer
        Registries of the Cantons of Basel, Geneva, St Gallen and Appenzell, Ticino, Vaud, and
        Zurich overlap directly with six of the seven regions covered by SHCS centres (all except
        the Bern SHCS Centre) (Clifford et al,
          2005).
Swiss cancer registries vary greatly both in size of population coverage (from
        165 000 in Neuchatel to 1168 000 in Zurich) and year of initiation of cancer
        registration (from 1970 in Geneva to 1996 in Ticino). Routine indicators of data
        completeness and quality in the Swiss registries are very good (Parkin et al, 2002; Curado et al, 2007).
Record linkage was performed using an upgraded version of an ad hoc
        software application that was previously designed and validated in Italy and Switzerland
        (Geneva) to match individuals from AIDS and cancer registries while protecting patient
        anonymity (Dal Maso et al, 2001;
          Clifford et al, 2005). Each SHCS
        centre holds its own nominal participant records. Thus, each SHCS database was independently
        matched with the corresponding cantonal cancer registry. Furthermore, to account for
        inter-cantonal migration and health-care mobility, cross-cantonal linkage within
        neighbouring cancer registries, including those that do not overlap with SHCS centres (i.e.,
        Neuchatel, Valais, and Glarus Graubunden), was also conducted. Personal identifiers were
        never made visible during linkage procedures, nor were they included in the output file.
From January 1985 through May 2007, 14 560 PWHA (median age, 33 years; 95%
        range, 22-54) were enrolled in the SHCS. PWHA were excluded (in hierarchical order)
        from this report if they: (1) did not report a legal residence in a canton covered by a
        cancer registry with which their SHCS records were linked (n=4512,
        principally those from the Bern SHCS Centre); (2) were followed by a private physician and
        were unavailable for name-based linkage (n=60); (3) their follow-up in the
        SHCS did not correspond to years for which data were available in cancer registries
          (n=520); or (4) were <16 years (n=4) or
        >69 years of age (n=35) at enrolment. Eventually, 9429 PWHA (median
        age, 32 years; 95% range, 22-53) were included. Of these, 29% were
        women and 18.1% had AIDS at study entry. For each PWHA included in the study, the
        relevant time period for the calculation of person-years at risk began 3 months after the
        date of SHCS enrolment and ended at 70 years of age, the date of last SHCS information,
        cancer diagnosis, or death, whichever was earliest.
Observed cancers included incident cases reported to cancer registries during the
        above-defined person-years at risk. In all, 103 cases of KS, 23 NHL, 3 invasive cervical
        carcinomas, and 10 NADCs diagnosed between 0 and 3 months after SHCS enrolment were
        considered prevalent cases and were not included. Cancers were classified according to the
          International Classification of Diseases for Oncology, Third
          Edition (Fritz et al,
          2000), and according to the International Classification of Diseases and
          Related Health Problems, 10th Revision (World Health Organisation, 1992).
This study was approved by the ethics committees of the SHCS and the International Agency
        for Research on Cancer. All patients in the SHCS gave written informed consent.
Statistical methods
Expected numbers of cancers were computed from cancer registry-, sex-, age-, and
          period-specific incidence rates (IRs) (Parkin et
              al, 1992, 1997, 2002; Curado
              et al, 2007) for three periods (pre-HAART, 1985-1996;
          early HAART, 1997-2001; late HAART, 2002-2006). Observed numbers of
          cancers in PWHA were compared with expected numbers by standardised incidence ratios
          (SIRs). Corresponding 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were computed using the
          Poisson distribution (Breslow and Day, 1987). All
          cancers other than KS, NHL, and invasive cervical carcinoma were grouped as NADCs.
          AIDS-defining cancers and NADCs were further combined into an 'all cancers'
          category.
The IRs among PWHA were also computed separately for the pre-, early-, and late-HAART
          periods. As the purpose was to make comparisons within the SHCS, IRs were standardised for
          age (5-year groups) and sex (when appropriate), using the direct method (Breslow and Day, 1987) and the age and sex structure
          of all PWHA included in this study as a standard population. The 95% CIs of IRs
          and of IR ratios in different periods were computed according to the Poisson
          distribution.
Age-specific IRs (i.e., 25-34, 35-44 and 45-54, and 55-69
          years) and corresponding 95% CIs were computed for selected NADCs separately in
          two periods (the pre-HAART and the HAART periods). Age-specific IRs were internally
          standardised for age (5-year groups) and sex (when appropriate) based on the distribution
          of all PWHA included in this study. For comparison purposes, the corresponding
          age-specific IRs published for 1998-2002 in the general population from the same
          Swiss cantons were also computed (Curado et
              al, 2007).

Results
Among 9429 SHCS participants followed for a total of 53 715 person-years, 858
        cancers were identified (Table 1). Observed and
        expected numbers and corresponding SIRs in the pre-, early-, and late-HAART periods are
        shown for cancer sites or types with at least two cases observed. The SIRs of KS, NHL, and
        invasive cervical carcinoma declined by several fold. The SIRs for some individual NADCs
        (i.e., anus, liver, and non-melanomatous skin) increased between the pre- and early-HAART
        periods, but not between the early- and late-HAART periods. The SIR for Hodgkin's lymphoma
        increased greatly between the pre- (9.2) and the early-HAART (21.0) periods, but little
        thereafter (28.1). The SIRs for cancer of the head and neck and the lung did not change,
        whereas the SIR for multiple myeloma declined. The SIRs for all NADCs combined did not
        substantially change by period. The SIR for the combination of all cancers diminished from
        17.6 (95% CI, 16.1-19.1) in the pre-HAART to 3.0 (95% CI,
        2.6-3.6) in the late-HAART period (Table
        1).
Table 2 is restricted to cancers with >10
        cases observed after the introduction of HAART. Age-standardised IRs in the pre-, early-,
        and late-HAART periods with corresponding IR ratios are shown. Large decreases of IRs for
        KS, NHL, and all cancers were observed between the pre- and early-HAART periods, whereas no
        significant change was found for NADCs (IR ratio, 1.2; 95% CI, 0.9-1.7).
        Increases were observed, however, from the pre- to early-HAART period, for cancer of the
        anus (IR ratio, 5.2; 95% CI, 1.3-21.3) and non-melanomatous skin cancer (IR
        ratio, 2.4; 95% CI, 1.0-5.7). When IRs of selected cancers in the early- and
        late-HAART periods were compared, additional declines in KS (IR ratio, 0.3; 95% CI,
        0.2-0.7), NHL (IR ratio, 0.4; 95% CI, 0.2-0.6) and all cancers (IR
        ratio, 0.6; 95% CI, 0.4-0.8) were found. The IR ratios (late-
          vs early-HAART period) for individual NADCs or their combinations were
        close to unity (lung, non-melanomatous skin, Hodgkin's lymphoma) or non-significantly below
        unity (head and neck, anus and liver) (Table
        2).
Figure 1 shows the steep downward trends in the IRs
        for all cancers, by gender. Decreases were greater among men than women and among men having
        sex with men than heterosexuals and intravenous drug users. The IRs for all cancers in the
        two sexes and in the three HIV-transmission categories became similar in the late-HAART
        period (Figure 1).
Age-specific IRs for cancer of the anus, liver, lung, non-melanomatous skin, Hodgkin's
        lymphoma, and all NADCs combined in PWHA in the pre-HAART and the HAART periods, and, for
        comparison purposes, in the general population (1998-2002), are shown in Figure 2. Cancer cases were extremely few in the
        pre-HAART period, especially in PWHA aged 35 years. The 95% CIs of
        age-specific IRs for individual NADCs in PWHA in the pre-HAART and HAART periods always
        overlapped. In the HAART periods, 95% CIs of IRs for cancer of the anus, liver,
        lung, non-melanomatous skin, Hodgkin's lymphoma, and all NADCs combined did not overlap with
        IRs from the general population in the 35-44- and 45-54-year age groups. In
        the 55-69-year age group, only for anal cancer did the IR in the HAART periods not overlap
        with the corresponding IR in the general population (Figure
          2).

Discussion
In this paper, we used SIRs to compare cancer excess in PWHA with that in previous studies
          (Clifford et al, 2005; van Leeuwen et al, 2009; Dal Maso et al, 2009), and IRs to
        evaluate cancer trends within the SHCS. Trends in cancer incidence in SHCS participants in
        the last two decades has been dominated by the favourable trends in KS and NHL. All cancer
        incidence (including both AIDS-defining cancers and NADCs) decreased in the late-HAART
        period by 81% compared with the pre-HAART period. Furthermore, mainly because of the
        decline in KS, previously large differences in cancer incidence between men and women, as
        well as between men having sex with men, heterosexuals, and intravenous drug users, have
        disappeared.
Further decreases in the incidence of KS and NHL also emerged between the early- and
        late-HAART periods. In the late-HAART period, treatment options increased and the risk of
        untreated viraemia became better appreciated than before (Hammer et al, 2008). Virological and immunological outcomes of
        initial HAART improved between 2000-2001 and 2004-2005 in the SHCS (Vo et al, 2008). Indeed, a higher
        proportion of KS and NHL occurred in HAART-naive PWHA in the early-HAART
        (46%) than in the late-HAART (27%) period (data not shown).
This study also showed that the incidence of all NADCs combined did not increase between
        the pre-HAART and HAART periods, even though by the late-HAART period it had become higher
        than the declining incidence of KS and NHL combined. In other studies using differently
        defined populations (e.g., HIV-positive people or people with AIDS only) and different
        statistical approaches (SIR or age-standardised IRs), increases in NADCs have been reported
        since the introduction of HAART (Engels et
            al, 2008; Patel et
          al, 2008; Dal Maso et
            al, 2009; Guiguet et
            al, 2009; van Leeuwen et
            al, 2009), especially for cancer of the anus (Piketty et al, 2008; Chaturvedi et al, 2009), liver (Rosenthal et al, 2007; Polesel
            et al, 2010), lung (Bower
            et al, 2003; Kirk et
            al, 2007), and Hodgkin's lymphoma (Biggar et al, 2006). Thus, concerns have been raised that HAART
        or its consequences (immune reconstitution) may have directly contributed to the increase of
        certain NADCs (Hammer et al,
        2008).
Drugs included in HAART have been attributed to both carcinogenic (e.g., incorporation of
        zidovudine into nuclear DNA and alteration of the expression of several cell-cycle genes)
          (Olivero, 2007) and anti-tumour (anti-angiogenic
        effect of protease inhibitors) (Monini et
            al, 2004) effects. Zidovudine and zalcitabine have been classified in an
        International Agency for Research on Cancer Monograph (IARC, 2000) as 'possibly carcinogenic to humans' on the basis of
        inadequate evidence in humans, but sufficient evidence of carcinogenicity in experimental
        animals (IARC, 2000). The hepatotoxicity of HAART
        was suspected to worsen the effect of hepatitis B and C infection on the risk of liver
        cancer (Puoti et al, 2004).
        Hodgkin's lymphoma was reported to occur more frequently in AIDS patients with moderate than
        severe immunosuppression in the United States (Biggar
            et al, 2006), as well as among those using non-nucleoside
        reverse transcription inhibitors in the United Kingdom (Powles et al, 2009). The possibility of some adverse effect of
        HAART on cancer risk will be raised again, and it is therefore important to use adequate
        monitoring tools to account for the concurrent dramatic increase in the life expectancy of
        PHWA (Polesel et al, 2010).
The SIRs for a few NADCs (anus, liver, non-melanomatous skin, and Hodgkin's lymphoma)
        increased in the SHCS after the introduction of HAART. At the same time, however, SHCS
        participants had grown older (the proportion of person-years from PWHA aged 35
        years had increased from 38% in the pre-, to 67% in the early-, and
        81% in the late-HAART period).
The SIRs, however, are based on the indirect adjustment method, meaning that a standard
        population (the general Swiss population) provides the rates, and the study population
        (PWHA) provides the weights (age and sex structure) (Schoenbach, 2000). Hence, if the PWHA age structure changes substantially, the
        comparison of SIRs over time becomes problematic. Using, more correctly, IRs
        age-standardised by the direct method (the application of age-specific IRs among PWHA in
        different periods to the age and sex structure of the same standard population, i.e., PWHA
        over the entire study), cancers of the anus and non-melanomatous skin were the only
        malignancies to increase significantly, and only between the pre- and the early-HAART
        periods in the SHCS. Although the direct method gives greater comparability, it requires
        more data than the indirect method (Schoenbach,
          2000). Therefore, even for the most frequent NADCs, the low number of cancer cases
        made the standardisation process unstable. Indeed, the 95% CI of age-specific IRs in
        PWHA in the pre-HAART and HAART periods broadly overlapped for individual NADCs, as well as
        for all NADCs combined.
Five individual NADCs showed a clear excess in the HAART periods among PWHA compared with
        the general population, regardless of statistical approach. Three of these NADCs (anus,
        liver, and Hodgkin's lymphoma) have a well-established viral aetiology (human papillomavirus
          (IARC, 2007), hepatitis B and C viruses (IARC, 1994), and Epstein-Barr virus (IARC, 1997), respectively). Contrary to KS and some
        types of NHL, a long latent period separates the infection with the responsible virus and
        the onset of cancer of the anus and liver. A viral aetiology for non-melanomatous skin
        cancer is not yet well established, except for the rare polyomavirus-associated Merkel cell
        carcinoma (Lanoy et al, 2009).
        Previous studies suggested that smoking could not totally account for the increases in lung
        cancer (The D:A:D Study Group, 2006; Chaturvedi et al, 2007), and that
        impaired immunity was associated with liver disease and liver cancer among PWHA infected
        with hepatitis B and C viruses (Clifford et
            al, 2008). The effect of HIV-related immunodeficiency on cancers of the
        lung and liver remains, however, ill-defined (Bouvard
            et al, 2009).
The SHCS has many strengths, including the length and completeness of follow-up and the
        good representation of women and different HIV-transmission categories (The Swiss HIV Cohort Study, 2010). Furthermore, the
        SHCS has been estimated to cover 45% of the cumulative number of HIV infections
        declared to the Swiss health authorities and 69% of registered AIDS cases, making
        the study unique in terms of population representativeness. The possibility of record
        linkage with high-quality cancer registries improved the completeness and quality of
        cancer-related information (e.g., histological confirmation) beyond what was available in
        the SHCS records.
The most important limitations of this study are 1) the relatively small number of
        individual NADCs, and 2) the complexity of adjusting for large decreases in competing
        non-cancer risks among PWHA (Keiser et
          al, 2004) without making implausible assumptions about the way removal of
        competing risks would have affected cancer risk (Rothman
            et al, 2008). Problems typical of record-linkage studies, for
        example, inaccuracies in personal identifiers and self-reported legal residence that may
        result in some undermatching between the SHCS participants and cancer registry records,
        cannot be completely excluded, but should have been largely avoided. With respect to
        surveillance bias, no difference was found in the risk of cancers in which screening can
        make a substantial difference (e.g., cancer of the colon-rectum, breast, prostate,
        and thyroid). Part of the excess of cancer of the anus and non-melanomatous skin, however,
        may be due to a more intense search and more accurate diagnosis of these cancers in PWHA
        than in the general population.
In conclusion, our study showed that the incidence of KS and NHL continued to decline from
        the early- to the late-HAART period, but the incidence of NADCs did not change
        substantially. Estimates of the excess of cancers of the anus, liver, lung, non-melanomatous
        skin and Hodgkin's lymphoma in PWHA compared with the general population (expressed as SIRs
        or age-specific IRs) became more precise in the HAART periods. Comparisons of the incidence
        of NADCs among PWHA in the pre-HAART and HAART periods remained very difficult, but they did
        not support claims of an adverse influence of HAART per se or HAART-related
        immune reconstitution on cancer risk.
