[Abstract, Methods, Results, Discussion, Discussion]

Ocular adnexal lymphoma in the Northeast Indian population. We present the clinical profile of biopsy and immunohistochemistry-proven ocular adnexal lymphomas in the Northeast Indian population. Nineteen patients between October 2004 and June 2006 with ocular adnexal lymphoma were analyzed retrospectively. Histopathological classification was done according to international working formulation. Twelve patients were male and seven were female. All were diagnosed as non-Hodgkin's lymphoma and the majority were B cell type (89%). Most of the cases (42%)were treated with radiotherapy followed by chemotherapy.

Materials and Methods
Case records from the Ocular Pathology Laboratory of
19 patients who presented between October 2004 and June 2006
were retrospectively analyzed. The modes of presentation were
studied. All the cases were biopsy and immunohistochemically
proven. Following a diagnosis of lymphoma, all patients were
evaluated by a medical oncologist for systemic involvement. A
detailed history followed by Snellen's visual acuity, slit-lamp
biomicroscopy, applanation tonometry, fundus evaluation by
indirect ophthalmoscopy and detailed proptosis evaluation
was done for all patients. B scans, ultrasound and computed
tomography (CT) scan was done in all cases.

Results
Nineteen patients were analyzed retrospectively, 12 patients
(63%) were male and seven (37%) were female. The age
ranged from 22 years to 85 years with mean age of 59.36 years
[Table 1]. Nine patients (47%) presented with proptosis
and five patients (26%) presented with an upper lid mass;
three (15%) as conjunctival mass and two (11%) as lacrimal
gland swelling [Table 2]. There was no past history of orbital
inflammatory disease in our series. All patients underwent
incision biopsy from respective site in most of the cases and
confirmed histopathologically and with immunohistochemistry (IHC).
Histopathological classification was done according
to international working formulation. Most of the tumors
morphologically consisted of heterogeneous population of
B-lymphocytes, cells with relatively large amounts of pale or
basophilic cytoplasm that have monocytoid appearance and
scattered immunoblast and centroblast-like cells. A proportion
of cases showed plasma cell differentiation. Moreover, the
tumor cells had a round to oval nucleus that appeared vesicular.
Some of the nuclei were cleaved. All patients were having
NHL. B-cell lymphomas (CD20, IHC) were seen in 17 cases
(89%) [Fig. 1], T-cell lymphoma (CD3, IHC) in one case (5%)
[Fig. 2 and Fig. 3] and lymphoepithelial lymphoma in one
case (5%) [Fig. 4]. Immunophenotypic analysis has shown that
most of the ocular adnexal lymphoid tumors are monoclonal
proliferation of B-lymphocytes consistent with NHL.
Histologically, orbital lymphomas were low to intermediate
in grade with predominance of the low-grade variety. The
range of follow-up was from three months to two years. Eight
patients (42%) had local radiotherapy in doses ranging from
25Gy to 46Gy, two (11%) had CHOP (cyclophosphomide,
doxorubicin, vincristine and prednisolone) chemotherapy
alone and one had combination with local radiation (28-30Gy)
and chemotherapy COP (cyclophosphomide, vincristine and
prednisolone). None of the patients had systemic involvement
and local recurrence.

Discussion
Ocular adnexal lymphoid lesions show characteristic clinical
features in most of the patients. They are most commonly
seen in the sixth to seventh decade of life with a slight
female preponderance. But the present study showed male
predominance (63%) which is comparable with other studies
from India.3,4 The most common site of involvement of
lymphoid tumor is the superior orbit behind the orbital septum
and 30 to 40% arise from the lacrimal gland.5 In our study 10%
of the cases presented with lacrimal gland involvement. The
lesion in this location results in proptosis with downward
displacement of globe. Eleven patients (58%) presented with a
mass in the superior orbit, either having lid mass or proptosis.
L26 clone of B-cell marker CD20 and the UCHL-1 clone of T-cell
markers CD45RO or CD 3 were used for immunohistochemistry
analysis.
Most of the tumors were B-cell origin (89%) followed by T-
cell origin (5%) and lymphoepitheloid lymphoma (5%) [Fig. 4].
Jakobiec has stressed that more than 60% of ocular adnexal
lymphoid infiltrates are composed of B-cell lymphomas.6 T-cell
lymphomas are rare in the ocular adnexa and can be suspected
on clinical and histopathological grounds.6 A tumor composed
of small lymphocytes that are CD5+ and also express CD23
is probably small lymphocytic lymphoma (SLL), not a MALT
lymphoma. CD5+ Mantle cell lymphoma is distinguished
from SLL by positive staining for cyclin D1 and negative
for CD23.7 None of the patients had Hodgkin's lymphoma,
which by itself a rarity in the orbit.2 Primary cases required
surgical intervention consisting of excision and debulking.
Most of the patients required radiation with careful ocular
shielding and some required chemotherapy based on working
classification of NHL. None of the patients had a recurrence
of the tumor or any systemic involvement. One of the most
important prognostic factors was the extent of the disease
discovered after thorough clinical staging.8 Long follow-up
is required to comment on final outcome. All patients with
ocular adnexal lymphoid tumor had a thorough systemic
evaluation by an oncologist which included a complete blood
count, bone marrow biopsy and ultrasonogram and CT scan
of the body and abdomen.7,9,10 Patients were re-evaluated at three months interval.

Conclusion
Malignant ocular adnexal lymphomas are common neoplasm in
the Northeast Indian population. In a 20-month period we saw
19 cases of NHL in our series. NHL (B-cell type) is the prime type
encountered in the assortment of ocular adnexal lesions and the
orbit is the foremost extranodal site of association. While the
number of patients presented here is small, the clinical inference
is that histological recognition of B-cell NHL in this part is a
significant observation.4 Males are on the whole affected more
than females. Superior orbit is the commonest site of the lesion.
Correct histological diagnosis with immunohistochemistry
ensures appropriate treatment.
