[Abstract, Introduction, Methods, Mixed, Mixed, Discussion]

Effects of omega-3 fatty acids on regulatory T cells in hematologic
neoplasms. The development of leukemia and lymphomas is related to the increase in inflammatory process modulators. These, in turn, have divergent actions on the neoplastic process. Populations of T cells have different roles in the neoplastic environment; while interferon-gamma positive T cells have antitumor activity, the FoxP3+interleukin-10 positive population present a pro-tumor activity. Simultaneously, the inflammatory process promotes the mobilization of fatty acids from the cell membrane to produce lipid mediators, which also participate of the inflammatory response. Eicosapentaenoic (EPA) and docosahexaenoic (DHA) omega-3 fatty acids, when incorporated in the plasmatic membrane, decrease the arachidonic acid (AA) metabolism and the production of eicosanoids derived from it. Thus, an alternative family of lipid mediators are produced that are often less inflammatory than those produced from arachidonic acid. Fatty acids can also influence the production of peptide mediators such as cytokines, and the expression of transcription factors, which can determine the production patterns of eicosanoids and cytokines as well as cell differentiation. Due to these properties, the objective of this literature review was to investigate studies published over the last 15 years on the effects of using omega-3 fatty acids on inflammatory markers in leukemia and lymphomas.

Introduction
The development of leukemia and lymphomas causes changes in the concentrations of
inflammatory modulators and cell proportions, which in turn, have divergent actions on
the neoplastic process. Although some populations of immune cells produce antineoplastic
cytokines, neoplastic cells can produce cytokines that will act on immune cells, causing
suppression of anticancer immunity(1).
Regulatory T cells (Tregs) can suppress the activity of other immune cells, such as T
CD8+ cells, dendritic cells, monocytes/macrophages, B cells, natural
killer (NK) cells and T natural killer (TNK) cells. In some oncologic situations, Tregs
have been related to the escape of tumor cells from anticancer immunity(2).
A higher number of Tregs was found in an analysis of the tissue of colorectal cancer
compared to the number found in the intestinal mucous membranes of healthy
individuals(3). In gastric
cancer, the progression of the disease is directly related to the increase in tumor
infiltrating Tregs(4).
Immune suppression by Tregs occurs via the expression of interleukin (IL)-10 and
transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-b) as well as through stimulation of the
receptor cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated protein-4 (CTLA-4) which inhibits the
response of T lymphocytes to antigens. The activity of Tregs is important to maintain
the immune homeostasis, preventing the development of autoimmune diseases, but can be
subverted by neoplastic cells in the evasion of antitumor immune responses(5).
In the inflammatory process, omega-3 (o-3) fatty acids are usually considered
important because, when incorporated into membrane phospholipids, they can be used as a
substrate in the production of inflammatory mediators (e.g. eicosanoids and resolvins)
during cellular stress. This metabolic process occurs in detriment of the arachidonic
acid (AA) metabolism, triggering the production of an alternative family of lipid
mediators, which, are often less inflammatory than those produced from AA. Additionally,
o-3 fatty acids can influence the production of peptide mediators (cytokines) and
the expression of transcription factors, which can determine the production pattern of
cytokines and eicosanoids(6,7). This body of information suggests that
the use of omega-3 fatty acids could modulate the inflammatory response, and thus,
assist in the combat against diseases with inflammatory backgrounds, including
neoplasms(7).
Hence, the aim of this review was to revisit studies published over the last 15 years to
investigate the effects of the use of o-3 fatty acids on inflammatory markers in
leukemia and lymphomas.

Methods
On September 3rd, 2012 a search of the Scopus and PubMed databases was
carried out of publications since 1998.
The search terms used were: (Leukemia OR lymphoma OR "hematological neoplasia"
OR "hematological cancer") AND ("fish oil" OR DHA OR EPA OR
"Omega 3"). Review articles and publications that did not evaluate the effects
of o-3 fatty acids or that were applied in healthy populations or in other disease
situations were excluded. Additionally a general overview about the effects of o-3
fatty acids on inflammation was conducted; the inflammatory process in neoplasias as
well as the supplementation of omega-3 fatty acids in these situations.
Omega-3 fatty acids and inflammation
The utilization of membrane phospholipid components to produce mediators occurs
during cellular stress, whether physical, biochemical or functional. Inflammation
causes constant cellular stress in both immune cells and host tissue cells with
reductions in the production of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) and a resulting increase
in the calcium channel permeability leading to a great influx of this ion into the
cell. The inflow of calcium ions into cells activates the cytosolic enzyme
phospholipase A2 or C metabolic pathways, which, in turn, act on the phospholipids of
cell membranes, making molecules of these fatty acids available to the cytosol. In
inflammatory cells, these free fatty acid molecules in the cytosol can be submitted
to the action of the cyclooxygenase (COX) or lipoxygenase enzymes (LOX) which in most
cells will lead to the formation of prostaglandins (PGs). Thromboxanes (TXs) and
prostacyclins are synthesized when this metabolism occurs inside platelets and
endothelial cells, respectively(8).
The eicosanoids [including PGs, TXs and leukotrienes (LTs)] derived
from AA (an o-6 fatty acid family component) are from the even series (e.g. 2
and 4 series) and mostly have a pro-inflammatory effect. The intake of o-3
polyunsaturated fatty acid (PUFA) increases the incorporation of o-3 fatty
acids in the cell membrane and increases the production of PGs, TXs and LTs derived
from the fatty acids (the odd series e.g. 3 and 5 series)(6). In one study, healthy volunteers who took a
supplement containing fish oil had increased incorporation of eicosapentaenoic fatty
acid (EPA) in the phospholipids of white blood cells after one week and, at the same
time, decreased the concentrations of o-6 fatty acids (e.g. AA)(9).
The LTs have important biological functions including a monocyte chemoattractant
action, polymorphonuclear leukocyte aggregation and degranulation, leukocyte
stimulation and adhesion to the endothelial wall during the formation of inflammatory
infiltrations. They are synthesized mainly by leukocytes and all cells have COX, but
only inflammatory cells have LOX(8).
AA, used as the main substrate to the synthesis of eicosanoids, is one of the most
abundant fatty acids in inflammatory cells. The o-3 fatty acids, EPA and
docosahexaenoic (DHA), when incorporated into the plasma membrane, reduce the
metabolism of AA and thus reduce the eicosanoids derived from it, because they have
higher affinity as substrates for COX-2 and LOX-5. Thus, an alternative family of
eicosanoids starts to be formed which are often less inflammatory than those produced
from AA. D and E series resolvins are also produced from o-3 fatty acids; these
are lipid mediators that have a powerful anti-inflammatory action (Figure 1). These fatty acids can influence the
production of peptide mediators (cytokines) and the expression of transcription
factors (such as nuclear factor kappa B - NF-kB) which can determine the production
pattern of cytokines and eicosanoids(6,7). Faber et
al.(9) reported that healthy
individuals who take oral supplements containing 2.4 g EPA and 1.2 g of DHA for one
week, have an increased ex vivo production of IL-1b, tumor
necrosis factor alpha (TNF-a), IL-6, IL-8 and interferon-gamma
(IFN-g).
Figure 1
Synthesis of lipid mediators from arachidonic acid (AA), eicosapentaenoic (EPA)
and docosahexaenoic (DHA) omega-3 fatty acids (Adapted from Calder (6))
The COX-1 and COX-2 enzymes are important in the regulation of the immune response
and have a key role in the inhibition of apoptosis, angiogenesis and cell
proliferation, as well as in cell mobilization. COX-2 (an induced isoform of the
enzyme) is expressed constitutively by all malignant and pre-malignant cells and has
been correlated with local chronic inflammation and tumor
neovascularization(10).
A reduction in the expression of COX-2 and, consequently, a decrease in the plasma
concentrations of prostaglandin E2(PGE2) was observed in an experiment in which rats
inoculated with tumor cells (Walker 256) were supplemented with fish oil(1 g/kg/day).
This was associated with an increase in the number of apoptotic cells inside the
tumor(11). COX-2 is
particularly associated with the production of (PGE2). This prostaglandin can bind to
its receptor on T cells inducing the production of adenosine 3',5'-cyclic
monophosphate (cAMP), leading to the inhibition of the proliferation of T helper
(Th)-1 lymphocytes and stimulation of the production of Th2 cells. Evidence shows
that deficiency in Th1 response can be linked to predisposition to cancer(10).
Neoplasias: inflammatory process
The inflammatory process triggered by the development of malignant neoplasias, can
have pro- or anti-neoplastic action. Cytokines such as TNF-a, IL-1 and IL-6
are among the most studied protein molecules in the inflammatory process of the tumor
microenvironment. Multiple myeloma cells produce IL-1b that stimulate the
production of IL-6 by bone marrow stromal cells that acts as a growth factor for
myeloma cells(12). Ovarian clear
cell adenocarcinomas present increases in the expression of IL-6, which may be
related to the stimulation of the production of inflammatory cytokines, the promotion
of tumor angiogenesis and to the migration of macrophages to the infiltrated
tumor(13).
Cytokines are released by different cell types however the immune cells have an
important role in the release of these agents in the neoplastic microenvironment.
While the T cell population, such as IFN-g+ T cells, can have
antitumor activity, another population, for example
FoxP3+IL-10+ cells present pro-tumor activity. Another
mediator, IL-17, secreted by T helper lymphocytes, stimulates the inflammatory
process and hence can promote both growth or regression of the tumor(1).
A study of patients with classic Hodgkin's lymphoma (HL) showed that plasma
concentrations of IL-2 were inversely correlated to levels of albumin (higher
concentrations of IL-2 were correlated with albumin at less than 4 g/dL) and disease
staging (higher concentrations of IL-2 in Stages I and II of the disease) This
suggests that IL-2 decreases gradually with the progression of the disease. In these
patients, the IL-4 and IL-10 cytokines (representatives of Th2-mediated response)
were positively correlated with prognostic variables, such as lymphopenia(lymphocyte
count less than or equal to 600 cells/mm3), hemoglobin lower than 10.5
g/dL, higher advanced stages of the disease (Stages III and IV), and high-risk
patients according to International Prognostic Index (IPI) classification(4).
Malignant cells can use a variety of methods to evade immunological response,
including overregulation of the expression of major histocompatibility complex (MHC)
molecules and overregulation of mechanisms involving T cell death. The production of
immunosuppressive cytokines (TGF-b and IL-10) by malignant cells can be
responsible for most of the inhibition of cell-mediated immunity and has been related
to several types of cancer, for example lymphomas(10). T cell anergy is common in malignant diseases, with
these cells frequently presenting abnormalities in their signal transduction
pathways. Among the alterations observed in T lymphocytes in malignant diseases is a
reduced ability to produce IL-2 and IFN-g by Th1. In addition, some types of
malignant cells produce a potent tumor growth stimulant and immunosuppressant factor,
known as TGF-b(10).
More recently, the crucial role that Th17 lymphocytes play in the development of
inflammatory autoimmune diseases, bone marrow transplant rejection and pro-tumor
function with the production of IL-1 family members was described. Th17 cells
participate in the inflammatory process of numerous immunological reactions through
the production of IL-17 and IL-22. The differentiation of cells from T0 (naive T
cells) to Th17 has been related to the presence of the TGF-b, IL-1 and IL-6
cytokines whereas stabilization of the differentiation is related to IL-23, mainly
produced by dendritic cells and macrophages(1,15).
There is evidence that the number of Th17 cells is higher in the tumor
microenvironment with these cells being found in several tumors, including in
hematological neoplasias. Initially, Th17 cells seem to have antitumor activity, but
with changes in the microenvironment, they promote neoplastic growth through the
synthesis of inflammatory mediators (TGF-b, IL-6, IL-23, IL-21, PGE2,
IL-1b, TNF-a), many of which are induced by IL-17(1).
The participation of TGF-b in the differentiation of Th17 puts this cell
lineage in a close relation with Tregs and so TGF-b also induces the
differentiation of naive T cells to Tregs in peripheral immune
compartments(16). Moreover, a
plasticity phenomenon has been observed between the T cell phenotypes; for example
the T CD8+ cells can express IL-17 (CD8+IL-17+ T) or
Tregs can take the phenotype of Th17 and vice versa, by reprogramming and changes in
gene expression in T cells(1).
According to Yang et al.(3),
hypoxia, a common feature in the tumor microenvironment, induces IL-17 expression in
FOXp3+ Tregs. CD4+FOXp3+IL17+ T cells
are cells that are in an intermediate point of differentiation between Tregs and
Th17(3).
The relation between neoplasms and the inflammatory process is complex and is
frequently discussed from two perspectives, intrinsic and extrinsic. The intrinsic
perspective states that genetic changes, established from cell genesis or triggered
by carcinogenic agents, provoke neoplastic transformation. These events include the
activation of several types of oncogenes by mutation, rearrangement or chromosomal
amplification and inactivation of tumor suppressor genes. The affected cells produce
inflammatory mediators thus creating an inflammatory microenvironment in tumors for
which there was no previous underlying inflammatory condition (e.g. breast tumors).
On the other hand, from the extrinsic perspective, local and systemic inflammatory
response (especially when chronic) and infections promote an environment that
increases the risk to develop cancer in a determined anatomical locus (e.g. colon,
prostate and pancreas)(17,18).
Additionally, there is coexistence between the malignant cells and the cells of the
immune system. While NK cells and cytotoxic T cells produce IFN-g and IL-2 in
order to inhibit growth of cancer cells (inhibiting the production of IL-1, IL-6 and
TNF-a), the malignant cells themselves secrete cytokines (IL-1, IL-6 and
TNF-a) that promote their own proliferation. Furthermore, these cytokines
stimulate macrophages and Tregs to secrete IL-4, IL-10, IL-13 and TGF-b that
will inhibit the production of cytokines by NK and T cells, causing a suppressant
effect in anticancer immunity (Figure
2)(19).
Figure 2
Role of the main cytokines in the tumor microenvironment (Adapted from
Seruga(19)
An accumulation of Th17 and Tregs was found in the tumor lymphocytic infiltration of
patients with early stages of gastric cancer. However, with the progression of the
disease there was a change in this balance characterized by a decrease in the Th17
cells and an increase in Tregs. This alteration may be a consequence of the
production of cytokines, such as, IL-21, IL-23, IL1b and TGF-b, in
the local microenvironment of gastric cancer. However, a direct correlation between
the production of IL-21 and IL-23 and the prevalence of Th17 cells was not observed
in these patients. A predominance of the Th2 cell-mediated inflammatory response was
observed in this neoplasia, with no changes between the different disease stages.
However, the balance between Th17 and Tregs was clearly modified(4).
The proportion of Th17 cells is higher in non-treated patients with acute myeloid
leukemia (AML) when compared with healthy individuals. However, in the same patients,
this proportion decreased after treatment and complete remission of the disease. The
production of IL-17, IL-6 and TGF-b1 cytokines is also greater in non-treated
patients with AML compared to healthy individuals(15).
Higher percentages of CD3+CD4+ and
CD3+CD8+ T lymphocytes were observed in peripheral blood
samples from patients with classical HL compared to healthy individuals, as well as
an increase in the concentrations of TNF, IFN-g, IL-4, IL-5 and IL-10 while no
difference was observed in the concentrations of IL-2. The increase of serum levels
of IL-10, was correlated with a worse prognosis according to an association with
clinical variables(14).
In a study of AML, patients with chemotherapy-induced cytopenia presented higher
levels of Tregs and lower levels of T cytotoxic-1 lymphocytes (Tc1) and Th1 compared
to healthy individuals. The levels of Th17 were similar in patients with untreated
AML and those with induced cytopenia. The levels of
CD4+CD25+FOXp3+ T cells were elevated in all
patients with AML. Additionally, a correlation between Th17 and Th1 was observed in
both untreated and treated AML(20).
In malignant diseases, the Th2-mediated immune response seems to promote neoplastic
development, while simultaneously inhibits Th1 response, the type of response with a
predominant antineoplastic activity(6). Additionally, neoplastic cells produce TGF-b which
stimulates neoplastic growth and differentiation of Th17 and Tregs. These cells
apparently promote neoplastic development and the suppression of immune antitumor
activity(1,14,21).

Neoplasias: supplementation with polyunsaturated fatty acids (o-3)
Fritschi et al.(22) investigated the
ingestion of fish in individuals who had developed leukemia, multiple myeloma and
non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL). They observed an association between higher consumption of
fresh fish and a protective effect against all neoplasias of the study. Moreover, a
higher consumption of energy and fat is associated with increased risk for the
development of these neoplasias. However, when the largest proportions of energy and fat
come from fresh fish, the risk to develop these diseases is lower. In a similar study,
Cvetkovie et al.(23)
investigated the profile of fatty acids in serum phospholipids of patients with NHL and
observed higher concentrations of palmitic acid (16:0), oleic acid (18:1 n-9),
dihomo-g-linolenic acid (DGLA, 20:3 n-6), AA (20:4 n-6) and docosatetraenoic
acid (22:4 n-6) and lower serum concentrations of EPA (20:5 n-3), DHA (22:6 n-3) and
docosapentaenoic acid (DPA, 22:5 n-3) when compared to the control group.
Some studies have reported the clinical effects of the use of omega-3 in neoplasias. In
one study with several types of cancer patients, there was no decline in the number or
function of polymorphonuclear cells when the volunteers were supplemented with 2 g of
fish oil for eight weeks during chemotherapy(24). Murphy et al.(25) and Van Der Give Meij et al.(26) offered fish oil as a dietary supplement in 16 and 20 lung
cancer patients, respectively during chemotherapy and observed that their body weight
and fat free mass were maintained. Similar results were observed in 10 colorectal cancer
patients under chemotherapy supplemented with 2 g of fish oil daily over nine
weeks(27), as well as in 19
patients after tumor resection from multiple locations, receiving the same dosage as the
former study during eight weeks of chemotherapy(24). Recently, the National Consensus on Oncology
Nutrition(28) reported that
immunomodulatory diets containing o-3 fatty acids showed benefits in cancer
patients including reduction in the incidence of post-operative infectious
complications, reductions in the intensity of the inflammatory response and severity of
infectious complications, and a reduction in hospital length of stay with a consequent
decrease in the cost of treatment.
Thus, o-3 fatty acids could help in the treatment of neoplasms by acting on the
production of lipid mediators with attenuated inflammatory activity or acting at the
resolution phase of the inflammatory process(4), on the expression of COX-2 enzyme with consequent inhibition of
PGE2(11), and in the production
of cytokines as well as transcription factors(19,20).

Hematological Neoplasias: supplementation with polyunsaturated fatty acids
(o-3)
Nine articles on fish oil and hematological neoplasias with in vivo and
in vitro methodological designs were found during the literature
review however three were repeated in both databases. Studies regarding this specific
subject in humans were not found (Figure 3).
Figure 3
Flowchart of the inclusion of articles from the Scopus and PubMed databases
This systematic review of the literature shows that there is a lack of studies that
evaluate the immunomodulatory effects of o-3 fatty acids on hematological
neoplasias. Among the six studies identified, four were in vitro
experiments and two used animal models (in vivo). The in
vitro studies found that neoplastic cells incubated with certain o-3
fatty acids, in isolation or in combinations, showed higher apoptosis induction rates.
In the study of Gillis et al.(29),
leukemia cells (HL60) were incubated with EPA, GLA (g-linolenic fatty acid an
o-6), or EPA-GLA at different concentrations for a period of between 2 and 24
hours. They observed that EPA and GLA (alone or associated) induced apoptosis as seen by
cellular redistribution of phosphatidylserine marked with Annexin V conjugated to
fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC). Yamagami et al.(30) incubated leukemic cells (KG1a) for 96 hours either in a culture
medium containing DHA or in a culture medium without DHA; the KG1a cells treated with
DHA had no changes in maturation cycle. However, these cells showed progressive loss of
viability, fragmented DNA and increase of phosphatidylserine exposure, thereby showing
an induction of Published between 1998 and 2012 SCOPUS Database PUBMED Database Figure 3 - Flowchart of the inclusion of articles
from the Scopus and PubMed databases apoptosis by DHA. In addition, the DHA had no
detrimental effect on normal hematopoiesis.
In the in vitro study of Altenburg et al.(31), acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL) cells were incubated
with EPA, 2,6-diisopropylphenol-docosahexaenoate (DIP) or EPA-DIP. After 48 hours the
EPA-DIP association induced apoptosis by activating the caspases cascade with consequent
degradation of the poly (ADP ribose) polymerase (DNA repairing enzyme). Additionally,
the EPA-DIP conjugation decreased the metastatic potential more efficiently than EPA and
DIP alone. In a similar study, Chiu et al.(32) incubated leukemic cells (HL-60) with DHA synthesized by a
microalgae (Crypthecodinium cohnii) and observed a delay in cell
proliferation, as well as induction of phosphorylation and inactivation of Rb protein
thereby promoting apoptosis of leukemic cells.
In an animal model, Ogilvie et al.(33)
provided supplements of o-3 fatty acids to dogs submitted to chemotherapy for
lymphoblastic lymphoma and observed that the association of o-3 fatty acids
increased overall survival and disease free survival. In another study, Johansson et
al.(34) gave diets enriched with
fish oil (source of o-3) or corn (source of o-6) to mice with lymphoma over
12 months and found that fish oil was significantly more effective than corn oil to
delay the progression of lymphoma during the first 8 months.
The experimental studies on fish oil and hematological neoplasias published in the
Scopus and PubMed databases between 1998 and August 2012 are listed in Table 1. The authors of this paper are developing
research on humans that evaluates inflammatory markers of individuals with hematological
neoplasias (acute Leukemia and non-Hodgkin Lymphomas) supplemented with fish oil.

Conclusions
The current literature regarding o-3 fatty acids presents a solid body of putative
positive effects regarding the application of this nutritional strategy in patients with
hematological neoplasias. The data suggest that, in these diseases, o-3 fatty
acids can potentially have indirect effects by promoting immunomodulation or direct
effects on neoplastic cells. Nevertheless, with this review we conclude the importance
of performing further clinical research to assess the possible immunomodulatory effects
of o-3 fatty acid supplementation in individuals with the diagnosis of
hematological neoplasias.
