[Abstract, Methods, Mixed]

Recurrent mutations in epigenetic regulators, RHOA
and FYN kinase in peripheral T cell lymphomas. Peripheral T-cell lymphomas (PTCLs) are a heterogeneous and poorly understood group of non Hodgkin lymphomas1,2. Here we combined whole exome sequencing of 12 tumor-normal DNA pairs, RNAseq analysis and targeted deep sequencing to identify new genetic alterations in PTCL transformation. These analyses identified highly recurrent epigenetic factor mutations in TET2, DNMT3A and IDH2 as well as a new highly prevalent RHOA p.Gly17Val (NM_001664) mutation present in 22/35 (67%) of angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphomas (AITL) and in 8/44 (18%) not otherwise specified PTCL (PTCL NOS) samples. Mechanistically, the RHOA Gly17Val protein interferes with RHOA signaling in biochemical and cellular assays, an effect potentially mediated by the sequestration of activated Guanine Exchange Factor (GEF) proteins. In addition, we describe new and recurrent, albeit less frequent, genetic defects including mutations in FYN, ATM, B2M and CD58 implicating SRC signaling, impaired DNA damage response and escape from immune surveillance mechanisms in the pathogenesis of PTCL.

METHODS
Patient samples
DNAs from PTCLs were provided by tumor banks at Columbia University
Medical Center in New York, USA; Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center, Miami,
USA; Hospital Central de Asturias in Oviedo, Spain; Centro Nacional de
Investigaciones Oncologicas in Madrid, Spain; Institut Gustave Roussy,
Villejuif, France; Centre Henri Becquerel, Rouen, France; and Hospital Clinic in
Barcelona, Spain. Samples were obtained with informed consent and analysis was
conducted under the supervision of the Columbia University Medical Center
Institutional Review Board. We selected samples for Whole Exome Sequencing based
on the availability of sufficient DNA from diagnosis, and normal (blood, buccal
swab or non tumor infiltrated biopsy material) matched samples.
Whole exome capture and nextgen sequence analysis
We used matched tumor and normal DNA samples from 12 PTCL patients
(Supplementary
Table 1) for exome capture with the SureSelect 50 Mb All
Exon kit (Agilent Technologies) following standard protocols. We performed
paired-end sequencing (2 x 100 bp) using HiSeq2000 sequencing instruments
at Centrillion Biosciences (Palo Alto, CA). Illumina HiSeq analysis produced
between 67.5 and 136.8 million paired-end reads per sample (Supplementary Table
2). We mapped reads to the reference genome hg19 using the
Burrows-Wheeler Aligner (BWA) alignment tool version 0.5.9. Mean depth (defined
as mean number of reads covering the captured coding sequence of a haploid
reference) was 45x with 84% of the genome covered more than 10x and 58%
covered more than 30x. We identified sites that differ from reference
(called here variants) in each sample independently. We constructed empirical
priors for the distribution of variant frequencies for each sample. We obtained
high-credibility intervals (posterior probability >=
1-10-5) for the corresponding change in frequency
between tumor and normal samples, using the SAVI algorithm (Statistical
Algorithm for Variant Identification) developed at Columbia University32,33. The number of germline SNPs in the coding region were
18,000 comparable with previous reports32. Most of the candidate germline SNPs (16,000, or
~90% of germline variants) were reported in dbSNP database. We identified
candidate somatic variants using the following criteria: variant total depth in
tumor and normal larger than 10x and smaller than 300x, variant
frequency larger than 15% in tumor and less than 3% in normal, and at least 1%
change in frequency from the normal with high posterior probability (>=
1-10-5). Also to remove systematic errors, we
excluded all variants that were found present in any of the normal cases. In
addition, to eliminate ambiguous mapping from captured pseudogenes, and regions
of low complexity, each variant with a flanking 20-base context sequence around
its genomic position was mapped to the hg19 reference using the BLAST algorithm.
We kept in the list only those with unique mappability, i.e. we required the
41-base sequence to uniquely map to the reference genome, with only one
mismatch.
Mutation validation
We designed primers flanking exons containing 121 randomly selected
candidate somatic variants identified by exome sequencing using Primer3, and
used Whole-Genome-Amplified (WGA) DNA from tumor and matched normal DNAs for PCR
amplification. We analyzed the resulting amplicons by direct bidirectional
dideoxynucleotide sequencing and obtained a validation rate of 90% (Supplementary Table
1).
RNA Sequencing, mapping, and identification of variants
After the exome sequence analysis of 12 tumor and normal PTCL samples
(Supplementary
Table 1); we analyzed 34 additional PTCL samples by
RNA-Seq using paired-end Illumina Hiseq sequencing. (Supplementary Table
7). We obtained on average over 67.6 million reads, 51.5
million (75.7%) mapped to the human NCBI reference sequence (RefSeq) using BWA
alignment algorithms20. Reads
mapping on the same starting position were discarded. We identified sites that
differed from the reference in each sample and constructed empirical priors for
the distribution of variant frequencies for each sample independently. In order
to reduce the false positive rate in variants detection and remove mapping
artifacts and systematic errors, we mapped samples' paired-end reads to
human RefSeq with Bowtie2 alignment algorithm21, which mapped a total of 1.83 billion reads of
reads (76%) properly to the reference. We then identified sites that differed
from the reference in each sample and intersected the set of variants identified
with both BWA and Bowtie2 alignments as previously described22. In all samples, we selected
variants with total depth >10x and frequency >20%, and
excluded variants identified in dbSNP135 database, as well as those which did
not pass the Multiplicity filter. In addition, variants corresponding to poorly
expressed (RPKM < 3) genes were removed to reduce the effects of spurious
PCR amplification during library preparation. In order to reduce the presence of
germline mutations, variants identified also present in 65 DNA-Seq samples from
unaffected individuals were excluded and we removed also variants common to
those present in 11 RNASeq samples from normal B and T cells. In detail, we
mapped the normal RNA-Seq sample reads with BWA and Bowtie to human RefSeq and
identified the variants, creating an internal normal variant database (INVD)
composed by the union of all the variants identified in normal B and T cells.
Successively, we filtered those variants occurring in PTCL samples overlapping
the INVD. Finally, we limited the list of variants to those identified in genes
found somatically mutated in PTCL by exome sequencing.
Targeted deep resequencing
Mutational analysis of selected genes of interest was performed by
targeted resequencing using microfluidics PCR (Access Array system; Fluidigm)
followed by sequencing of the amplicon libraries in a MiSeq instrument
(Illumina). Primers targeting the regions of interest were designed at Fluidigm
to produce amplicons of 200 bp +- 20 bp. We performed multiplex PCR
amplification of up to 10 amplicons per well in the Fluidigm Access Array chip
according to the manufacturer's instructions using 30 ng of DNA per sample.
After multiplex PCR amplification the resulting DNA products were barcoded so
that all amplicons corresponding to the one sample carry the same index. Indexed
libraries were pooled and the resulting library was quantified by quantitative
PCR using the Kapa Library Quantification Kit (Kapa Biosystems) in a 7500 PCR
instrument (Applied Biosystems). Amplicon libraries were spiked with ~25%
PhiX genomic library to increase amplicon diversity and sequenced in a MiSeq
instrument to generate 2x251 bp paired reads following an amplicon
sequencing protocol for custom primers. Each pair of the paired end reads
produced by MiSeq were stitched together using FLASH version 1.2.6 (Fast Length
Adjustment of SHort reads), given that the amplicon sequences (up to 200 bp)
were shorter than the read length (251 bp). This step increases the quality of
the reads correcting for mismatches in the overlap by selecting the base with
higher quality. Then, 5' and 3' adaptors and PCR primer sequences, were trimmed
using cutadapt. Merged and trimmed reads were aligned to the UCSC hg19 reference
genome using BWA-MEM as single-end reads. Aligned reads were analyzed for
variants using the SAVI (Statistical Algorithm for Variant Identification)
algorithm and variants were selected based on coverage depth and frequency.
Given the presence of significant normal cells in most PTCL samples, variants
around 50% frequency were flagged as candidate private germline SNPs. Candidate
variants identified by this first round of amplicon resequencing were
independently validated in a second round of targeted deep sequencing. Briefly,
we selectively amplified the amplicons covering the positions of candidate
mutations in their corresponding positive samples, barcoded these PCR products,
pooled them and sequenced the resulting library in a MiSeq instrument as
detailed before.
RNAseq gene fusion analysis
We performed gene fusion analysis in RNAseq data using ChimeraScan
23 and deFuse
24 algorithms, which
identify gene fusion candidates by detecting read pairs discordantly mapping to
two different genes. From this analysis we then successively reduced the
candidate list by applying homology-based filters and by detecting reads
spanning across the junction breakpoint (Split Reads). Finally, we annotated
candidate fusions on the base of the breakpoint coordinates, predicted amino
acid sequence, open reading frame conservation and UniProt database proteomic
information.
Quantitative RHOA p.Gly17Val allele specific qPCR
assay
Analysis and quantitation of RHOA p.Gly17Val was
performed using a Mutation Detection Assay Competitive Allele-Specific
TaqMan(r) PCR (Life Technologies) following the manufacturer's instructions
with slight modifications. All analyses were conducted on a 7500 real-time PCR
system run with 7500 software (v.2.0.6 Applied Biosystems). The assay was run in
96-well plates in a reaction volume of 20 mL, using 50 ng of genomic DNA,
10 mL of Taqman Universal PCR Master Mix 2x, and 2 mL of specific
Taqman assay 10x (RHOA wild type or
RHOA p.Gly17Val). We used a thermal profile of 10 min at
95degC for Hot Gold Start activation followed by 40 cycles of amplification
(95degC for 15 s and 55degC for 60 s). The threshold detection was set
at 0.05. Standard curves of CT vs. log template
amount for each specific assay were linear over the range of 25 to 250,000
copies of plasmid DNA. We determined a sensitivity of detection for the
RHOA p.Gly17Val mutant allele assay of <0.1% by
analyzing samples consisting of 10, 25, 102 and 103 copies
of RHOA p.Gly17Val mutant allele plasmid DNA spiked into 30 ng
(104 copies) of wild type genomic DNA, which corresponds to
samples containing 0.1%, 0.25%, 1% or 10% mutation load, respectively. Data
analysis was performed with the Mutation Detector(tm) Software (Life
Technologies). Briefly, in mutation analysis calculations, the difference
between the CT value of the mutant allele assay and the CT
value of the wild type allele assay is calculated for all mutant allele assays
run on the sample. This DCT value represents the quantity of
the specific mutant allele detected within the sample and is used to determine
the sample mutation status by comparison to a predetermined detection
DCT cutoff value.
Structural depiction and analysis
We identified structural coverage of the FYN protein through use of the
PSI-Blast and SKAN algorithms. The structures 2DQ7, 2DLY, 3UA7, 2LP5, and 1G83
were structurally aligned into composite structures to assess for conformational
flexibilities, and subsequently analyzed through use of the Chimera
Suite25,26. In silico modeling of
identified mutations was performed using the I-TASSER software suite and
Modeller program; structures were refined and analyzed in Chimera25,27. We predicted protein stability changes upon mutation
through use of the SDM potential energy statistical algorithm and associated
software37. We created all structural images using UCSF
Chimera25.
Plasmids and vectors
We obtained pcDNA3 EGFP-RHOA WT (plasmid#12965) containing the full
length human RHOA construct fused to EGFP as well as pcDNA3 EGFP-RHOA Thr19Asn
dominant negative (plasmid #12967) and pcDNA3 EGFP-RHOA Gln63Leu constitutively
active mutants (plasmid #12968) from Addgene, Inc28. We generated the RHOA
p.Gly17Val allele by site directed mutagenesis on the mammalian expression
pcDNA3 EGFPRHOA WT using the QuickChange II XL Site-Directed Mutagenesis Kit
(Stratagene) according to the manufacturer's instructions. We cloned PCR
products encompassing wild type RHOA, RHOA
p.Gly17Val, RHOA p.Thr19Asn and RHOA
p.Gln63Leu with an N-terminal HA tag as
BglII-XhoI fragments into the pMSCV vector
for retroviral expression. We obtained pRK5 c-FYN plasmid containing a full
length FYN open reading frame29 from Addgene, Inc. (Plasmid #16032) and
introduced FYN p.Leu174Arg, FYN
p.Arg176Cys, FYN p.Tyr531His and FYN
p.Thr342Ile Tyr531His mutations using the QuickChange II XL Site-Directed
Mutagenesis Kit (Stratagene). All constructs were verified by sequencing. Wild
type and mutant FYN cDNAs containing an N-terminal HA tag were subcloned into
pcDNA3.1(-) and into the MSCV240-puromycine-IRES-GFP retroviral vector.
The CSK-pcDNA3.1 (+) hygro plasmid expressing a full length CSK cDNA open
reading frame was a gift from Dr. Xin-Yun Huang (Cornell University, New York,
NY). We cloned FYN SH2 domain complementary DNA constructs encoding wild type
FYN SH2 domain (codons 148-231) with an N-terminal GST tag in the pGEX4-T1
expression vector between the EcoRI and XhoI
restriction sites. We generated the FYN SH2 domain mutations Leu174Arg and
Arg176Cys by site-directed mutagenesis on the E. coli
expression pGEX4-T1 FYN SH2 domain vector using the QuikChange II XL
Site-Directed Mutagenesis Kit (Stratagene) according to the manufacturer's
instructions.
Cell lines
We cultured HEK293T (Thermo Scientific), HeLa (ATCC) and Rat1A cells (a
gift from Dr. Ana Lasorella, Columbia University) in DMEM media supplemented
with 10% fetal bovine serum, 100 U ml-1 penicillin G and 100
mg ml-1 streptomycin at 37degC in a humidified
atmosphere under 5% CO2. We maintained Jurkat cells (ATCC) under
similar conditions in RPMI 1640 media supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum.
Cell lines were regularly tested for mycoplasma contamination.
Retroviral production and infection
We transfected the retroviral constructs pMSCV-HARHOA, pMSCV-HA-RHOA
Gly17Val, pMSCV-HA-RHOA Gln63Leu, pMSCV-HA-RHOA Thr19Asn, pMSCV-FYN, pMSCV-FYN
Tyr531His, pMSCV-FYN Thr342Ile Tyr531His, pMSCVFYN Arg176Cys, pMSCV-FYN
Leu174Arg and the pMSCV control plasmid with gag-pol and VSVG expressing vectors
into HEK293T cells using JetPEI transfection reagent (Polyplus). We collected
viral supernatants after 48h and used them for infection of Rat1A and Jurkat
cells by spinoculation. After infection, we selected cells for 4 days in media
containing 1 mg/ml of puromycin.
Western blot
Western blot analysis were performed using standard procedures with the
following antibodies: RHOA (67B9) rabbit monoclonal antibody against RHOA
(#2117, Cell Signaling Technology)30; FYN rabbit polyclonal antibody (#4023, Cell Signaling
Technology)31;
Phospho-Src Family (Tyr416) polyclonal antibody (#2101, Cell Signaling
Technology)32; CSK
(CSK-04) mouse monoclonal antibody (sc-51580, Santa Cruz Biotechnology); GST
mouse monoclonal antibody (clone DG122-2A7, Millipore,
1DB-001-0000851588)33;
GAPDH goat polyclonal antibody (sc-20357, Santa Cruz Biotechnology)34; ARGHEF1 goat polyclonal
antibody (sc-8492, Santa Cruz Biotechnology)35 and a rat monoclonal antibody specific for HA tag
(11867423001, Roche Diagnostics, 1DB-001-0000868977).
Immunofluorescence
We analyzed F-actin in Hela cells transfected with plasmids expressing
GFP, GFP-RHOA, GFP-RHOA Gln63Leu, GFP-RHOA Thr19Asn and GFP-RHOA Gly17Val by
Phalloidin Texas Red staining (1:100; Life Technologies), followed by DAPI
(4',6-Diamidino-2-Phenylindole, Dihydrochloride) staining and confocal
microscopy on a Zeiss LSM510-NLO microscope.
RHOA protein expression in Escherichia coli, purification,
and GEF exchange assay
We expressed wild type RHOA, RHOA Gly17Ala and RHOA Gly17Val proteins as
GST-tagged proteins in E. coli Rosetta 2(DE3) cells. We induced
expression of the fusion proteins in bacteria cells with 0.1 mM
isopropyl-b-D-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG) for 16h at 18degC. We
harvested cells and lysed them in lysis buffer (20 mM Hepes, pH 7.5, 150 mM
NaCl, 5mM MgCl2, 1 mM DTT, 1% Triton X-100, 0.5 mg / ml lysozyme) supplemented
with Complete EDTA-free protease inhibitor (Roche). We purified GST-tagged RHOA
proteins by binding them to immobilized glutathione Sepharose beads (Thermo
scientific) and eluting them with 50 mM reduced Glutathione, 50 mM HEPES, pH
7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 5 % glycerol, 1 mM DTT. We assessed
protein expression and purity by Coomassie staining. Next, we analyzed the
capacity of purified recombinant GST-RHOA, GST-RHOA Gly17Ala and GST-RHOA
Gly17Val proteins to incorporate GTP in response to recombinant MCF2L/DBS-His
(Cytoskeleton, Inc.) with the RhoGEF exchange assay kit (Cytoskeleton, Inc.)
following the manufacturer's instructions. Briefly, this assay analyzes the
uptake of the fluorescent nucleotide analog N-methylanthraniloyl-GTP (mant-GTP)
into RHOA by measuring the spectroscopic difference between free and RHOA-bound
mant-GTP. As mant-GTP gets bound in the nucleotide binding pocket of RHOA in
response to a GEF protein, its fluorescence (ex: 360 nm, em: 440 nm) increases
dramatically. Thus, enhancement of mant-GTP fluorescent intensity in the
presence of RHOA indicates nucleotide uptake by the GTPase.
RHOA activation assay
We used Jurkat cells expressing wild type HA-RHOA, HA-RHOA
Gly17Val, HA-RHOA Thr19Asn and HA-RHOA Gln63Leu and plated them at
106 cells/ml in RPMI 0.5% FBS. After 24 hours we spun them down
and resuspended in serum-free RPMI 1640 media. For serum stimulation cells were
treated with media containing 10% FBS for 10 min. We washed serum starved and
serum stimulated cells once with ice cold PBS and lysed them in Lysis buffer (50
mM Tris pH 7.5, 10 mM MgCl2, 0.3 M NaCl and 2% IGEPAL). After
spinning down to remove debris and membranes we quantified lysate protein
content using the Precision Red Advanced Protein Assay (Cytoskeleton, Inc.).
Next we incubated 100 mg of total cleared protein lysate with 20
ml Rhotekin-RBD beads (Cystoskeleton, Inc.) for 1h at 4degC with
rotation. After incubation we washed the Rhotekin-RBD beads with 500 ml
wash buffer (25 mM Tris pH 7.5, 30 mM MgCl2 and 40 mM NaCl),
resuspended them in 15 ml SDS-PAGE loading buffer. Rhotekin bead samples
were loaded into a Bis-Tris gel and proteins were resolved by electrophoresis in
MES buffer and transferred to a PVDF membrane. The presence of HA-tagged
activated RHOA associated with the Rhotekin-RBD beads was determined by
immunoblotting using an HA antibody following standard procedures.
Immunoprecipitation and Western blot analysis of FYN activation
We performed FYN immunoprecipitations in Rat1A cells infected with
control (empty vector) retroviruses or retroviruses expressing wild type FYN,
FYN Leu174Arg, FYN Arg176Cys and FYN Tyr531His and analyzed FYN phosphorylation
via Western blot analysis using a Phospho-Src Family (Tyr416) polyclonal
antibody (#2101, Cell Signaling Technology).
FYN protein expression in Escherichia coli, purification,
and peptide binding assays
We expressed wild type and mutant FYN SH2 domain as GST-tagged proteins
in E. coli Rosetta 2(DE3) cells as detailed for the production
of GST-RHOA fusion proteins before. Next, we performed peptide binding assays
with Pull-Down Biotinylated Protein-protein Interaction Kit (Thermo scientific)
according to the manufacturer's instructions using an amino acid 527-537 FYN
biotinylated peptide (biotin-Thr Glu Pro Gln Tyr Gln Pro Gly Glu Asn Leu); an
amino acid 527-537 pTyr531 FYN biotinylated peptide (biotin- Thr Glu Pro Gln
pTyr Gln Pro Gly Glu Asn Leu) and an amino acid 527-537 Tyr51His FYN
biotinylated peptide (biotin- Thr Glu Pro Gln His Gln Pro Gly Glu Asn Leu)
(Anaspec Inc). Briefly, we incubated synthetic biotinylated peptides with
purified GST-FYN SH2 domain, mutant FYN SH2 domain or GST alone proteins for 1 h
at 4degC, resolved and analyzed interacting proteins via 10%
SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) followed by transfer to a PVDF
membrane and Western blot analysis with an anti-GST antibody.
CSK FYN inhibition assay
We transfected Hela cells with plasmids driving expression of wild type
(pRK5 c-FYN) and activating mutant FYN alleles (pRK5 FYN Leu174Arg, pRK5 FYN
Arg176Cys and pRK5 FYN Tyr531His) alone and with a vector driving expression of
CSK (CSK-pcDNA3.1) at ratios 1:1 and 1:3 and analyzed the levels of FYN
activation and FYN and CSK expression via Western blot analysis.
Dasatinib FYN inhibition assays
We transfected HEK293T cells with vectors driving the expression of
activated mutant FYN proteins (pRK5 FYN Leu174Arg, pRK5 FYN Arg176Cys and pRK5
FYN Tyr531His). After 48 hours cell cultures were treated with increasing
concentrations of dasatinib (Selleck Chemicals) for 6 hours and analyzed for FYN
phosphorylation and FYN expression by Western blot analysis. Similarly,
transformed Rat1A cells expressing the FYN Tyr531His mutant or a double FYN
Thr342Ile Tyr531His mutant protein were treated with vehicle only or dasatinib
(1mM) for 6 hours and analyzed for FYN phosphorylation and FYN expression
by Western blot analysis.
Cell proliferation assays
We analyzed relative cell growth at 72 hours of vehicle only treated and
dasatinib treated (1mM) Rat1A transformed cells expressing either the FYN
Tyr531His mutant or a double FYN Thr342Ile Tyr531His mutant protein. Cell growth
was determined in triplicates by measurement of the metabolic reduction of the
tetrazolium salt MTT using the Cell Proliferation Kit I (Roche) following the
manufacturer's instructions.
Statistical analyses
We evaluated differences in the percentages of RHOA
wild type and RHOA Gly17Val mutant in different PTCL groups
using the Fisher's exact test. We analyzed differences in cell growth rates in
control and dasatinib treated cells using the Student's t test.
We tested the linear correlation between tumor content in PTCL samples and
RHOA p.Gly17Val allele burden with the coefficient of
determination R2.

Supplementary Material
1
2
