[Abstract, Introduction, Methods, Results, Discussion]

Oncohematological diseases in the Vale do Para?ba, State of S?o Paulo: demographic aspects, prevalences and incidences. Background Based on the necessity of detailed information that supports effective strategies to improve cancer outcomes in the different regions of Brazil, the aims of this study were to report demographic aspects and to calculate the prevalence and incidence rates of oncohematological diseases in the region of Vale do Paraiba.   Methods This is a multicentric prospective study carried out from October 2009 to March 2010. A total of 500 over 19-year-old patients were enrolled. Data such as type of healthcare insurance, gender, age, ethnic classification, place of residence, schooling, income, body mass index, new cases and the period between the first symptoms and a definite diagnosis were collected. The prevalence and incidence rates were calculated according to an estimated number of 1,319,800 inhabitants.   Results The prevalence and incidence rates per 100,000 inhabitants in the period of six months were, respectively: acute myeloid leukemia 1.5 and 0.7; acute lymphoblastic leukemia 0.5 and 0.1; chronic lymphocytic leukemia 2.4 and 0.4; chronic myeloid leukemia 6.2 and 0.8; Hodgkin's lymphoma 2.9 and 0.9; non-Hodgkin lymphoma 9.8 and 4.3; multiple myeloma 5.7 and 0.7; myelodysplastic syndromes 2.1 and 0.2 and myeloproliferative syndromes 5.1 and 0.3.   Conclusion Giving the paucity of data in this field of investigation, our data may be useful for comparisons with those of other regions of Brazil and will assist in the implementation of treatment programs of oncohematological diseases in this region.

Introduction
Experts from various oncological fields agree that cancer control requires
comprehensive, regionalized information which reflects the characteristics and needs
of the local population.(1)
Therefore, the analysis of demographic characteristics and estimates of prevalence
as well as the incidence of malignancies may be important for proper planning of
priorities and the definition of the feasibility of treatment in a given
population.
Oncohematological diseases represent a subset of all cancers, some of which require
expensive treatment regimens and others are potentially lethal. Unfortunately, there
are insufficient data to provide specific information on demographics, and
prevalence and incidence rates of oncohematological diseases in different regions of
Brazil.
The Vale do Paraiba, State of Sao Paulo, due to its economic and social
development (population, territorial expansion, industrialization) and the formation
of a multicenter research group in oncohematology, has made great strides in
collecting data on patients with oncohematological diseases. Taking into
consideration these factors, this study aims to report the demographic
characteristics of patients and the prevalence and incidence of oncohematological
diseases in the Vale do Paraiba.

Methods
This study was carried out by the Grupo de Onco-hematologia do Vale do Paraiba
(GOHV). The GOHV consists of medical oncohematological representatives of the
following services: Hospital Frei Galvao of Guaratingueta, Regional
Hospital of the Vale do Paraiba, located in the city of Taubate,
Oncovida - Oncohematological Treatment Center of Taubate, Pio XII Hospital in
Sao Jose dos Campos and the Hematology Service of Sao
Jose dos Campos.
The services of the Hospital Frei Galvao, Regional Hospital of Taubate
and Pio XII of Sao Jose dos Campos are referral centers from the
Regional Health Division XVII, composed of 39 municipalities in the Vale do
Paraiba. These different services treat patients with oncohematological
illnesses under the Brazilian National Health Service (SUS). Together, the services
that comprise the GOHV attend all adult SUS oncohematological patients and more than
90 percent of adult patients from other healthcare insurers in the region.
A questionnaire was developed by the GOHV regarding demographics and diagnoses.
Physicians of the different services applied the questionnaire to all patients seen
during the period from October 2009 to March 2010. At the end of the period, 500
patients had been enrolled in the study.
The criteria for inclusion in the study were: 1) the patient must be over 19 years of
age (the departments involved do not treat pediatric patients); 2) the patient must
agree to participate in the study (the patients agreed to answer the questionnaire)
and the project was authorized by the Research Ethics Committees of the hospitals
involved (in hospitals that did not have an Ethics Committee the project was
approved by its Technical Council); and 3) diagnostic confirmation by
histopathologic examination such as corroborative exams (immunohistochemistry,
immunophenotyping, bone marrow aspirate, cytochemistry, bone marrow karyotype and
investigation of specific mutations). The diagnostic criteria were based on the
French-American-British (FAB) classification for acute leukemias and the World
Health Organization criteria for multiple myeloma, lymphomas, leukemias, chronic
myeloproliferative syndromes and myelodysplasias.(2-4) The
classifications of histologic types of lymphoma and subtypes of myelodysplastic
syndromes were also based on criteria of the World Health Organization.(5-6)
The prevalence was defined as the total number of cases of a certain disease during
the study period divided by the estimated number of population. The incidence was
defined as the number of new cases of a certain disease during the study period,
divided by the estimated population. Based on data from the 2000 census of the
Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics (IBGE),(7) we estimated the population of over 19-year-old
individuals in the Vale do Paraiba to be 1,319,800.
Discrete variables (demographic factors) were compared using contingency (2 x 2)
tables using the Fisher exact test and the approximation of Katz. P-values of less
than 0.05 were considered significant.

Results
Demographic data are presented in Table 1. A
total of 82.6% of patients were treated under the Brazilian National Health Service
(SUS) and there were no significant differences between the percentages of men and
women. The distribution of ages showed a higher frequency of 50 to 80-year-old
patients, 79.8% of patients reported being white and 92.8% lived in urban areas. The
majority of participants had between one and four years of schooling. Most patients
(59.6%) reported incomes either between 1 to 3 minimum wages or 3 to 6 minimum
wages. The body mass index (BMI) at diagnosis was within the normal range for 63.4%
of patients (values between 18.5 to 25 kg/m2). New cases accounted for
22.4% of patients and the period between first symptoms and definitive diagnosis of
the disease was less than two months in 34.6% of these cases. A low education level
(less than eight years of schooling) was correlated with low wages (p-value <
0.0001; RR = 2.390) and with a period greater than two months for a diagnostic
definition (p-value < 0.0001; RR = 1.955).
The M3 FAB subgroup was more common among the diagnoses of acute myeloid leukemia.
There were no significant differences in the proportions of other groups of acute
leukemia. The B phenotype was more frequent in chronic lymphoid leukemia and the
chronic phase was predominant in chronic myeloid leukemia. The morphological subtype
nodular sclerosis was observed more frequently in patients with Hodgkin's lymphoma
followed by those cases classified as having mixed cellularity. Non-Hodgkin large
B-cell was the most common in this group followed by follicular lymphomas. In
regards to the diagnosis of multiple myeloma, the predominant subgroup was
immunoglobulin G (IgG) followed by immunoglobulin A (IgA). The refractory anemia
subgroup was most common in cases of myelodysplastic syndrome as was polycythemia
vera and essential thrombocythemia in myeloproliferative disorders. Data such as the
number of cases, the subtypes and the prevalence and incidence rates per 100,000
inhabitants of different groups of oncohematological diseases are shown in Table 2.

Discussion
There were no significant differences in respect to gender even though some
oncohematological diseases have different incidences for men and women. The study
addressed all over 19-year-old patients however we noted that most patients were in
the range from 50 to 80 years old. A possible explanation for this observation,
considering Sao Jose dos Campos the largest city in the Vale do
Paraiba, is the evolutionary analysis of population pyramids; the population
is aging because of lower birth rates.(8) This seems to be a pattern common to other cities in this
region. Another possible argument is based on the design of the study. The review
group considered all types of oncohematological disorders: lymphoma, leukemia,
chronic leukemias, multiple myeloma as well as myelodysplastic syndromes and
myeloproliferative disorders. Many of the diseases in our study have higher rates in
elderly patients, a situation reflected in our statistics.
In our analysis, the ethnic background of patients was to some extent biased due to
the subjectivity of the question. This variable was studied according to the
definition of each patient without any influence of the medical professional who
applied the questionnaire. Thus, some patients reported being white rather than
mulatto; this phenomenon was not observed for black and Asian classifications.
The Vale do Paraiba has enjoyed an industrial boom in recent decades which
explains the large number of patients living in urban areas. Invariably, patients
who live in rural areas have a difficult time accessing emergency care services in
the period after chemotherapy and the lack of proper care during these stages can
increase mortality rates. Campbell et al.,(9) showed that the distance between the residence of the
patient and the treatment center was associated with lower chances of confirmation
of diagnosis before death in cases of stomach, breast, colon and rectal cancers and
also showed lower survival rates for prostate and lung tumors. Jones et
al.(10) observed that long
distances travelled to general hospitals (not oncological centers) were associated
with more advanced stages at diagnosis for breast, colon and rectal cancer, and an
increased risk of death for patients with prostate cancer. These data together with
those observed in our study were the basis for new treatment strategies in GOHV
services aiming at supporting patients living in rural areas. These measures include
special transport services between home and hospital, nighttime home support for the
patient and even extending the length of hospitalization for patients with severe
neutropenia after chemotherapy.
Schooling, measured by the number of years of formal education for a given
population, has been used as an assessment tool. In Brazil, the mean number of years
of schooling is 5.7,(11) thus less
than countries such as the USA (12 years), Canada (11.6 years) and Sweden (11.4
years).(12) In the State
of Sao Paulo the average level of schooling for the heads of households
varies with the number of inhabitants in each municipality. Towns with up to 5,000
inhabitants had a mean number of years schooling of 3.5 years, those with 20,000 to
50,000 inhabitants, had an average of 4.5 years and those with more than 500,000
residents had an average of 6.7 years.(11) In our study, we observed a higher rate of patients with
only one to four years of schooling, yet the proportion of patients with this level
of education was not significantly different from groups with four to eight years,
eight to eleven years or even over eleven years of education. In Brazil the average
income is 769.00 reals and in the State of Sao Paulo the average is 1076.00
reals.(13) We found a wide
variation in the 39 municipalities that make up the Vale do Paraiba region.
The population of the town of Arapei had a mean income of 287.37 reals, while the
averages of Sao Jose dos Campos and Taubate were 972.30 and
923.29 reals, respectively. The overall average of the municipalities in our study
was 714.13 reals. Our results showed similar results as the vast majority of
patients were stratified in groups that earned 1 to 3 minimum wages and 3 to 6
minimum wages. Our initial expectation was that the levels of education and income
would be lower, yet we observed levels comparable to state and national averages
even in a sample predominantly of Brazilian National Health Service (SUS) patients.
Previous studies have shown that low socioeconomic status is associated with worse
survival rates related to different types of neoplasms.(14-16) Our
study showed a group of patients with lower education levels (8%) and based on
studies, some support measures were implemented such as social support, improvement
of the language used in treatment guidelines as well as periodic evaluations to
determine the degree of understanding of these patients regarding their
treatment.
Considering the high number of SUS patients in this study we expected to find more
patients with a low BMI and again the results were the opposite. Interestingly the
BMI was high in 24% of the sample. Tarella et al.(17) found a higher risk of death in obese patients
with non-Hodgkin lymphoma. Jones et al.(18) demonstrated that obesity was associated with better
survival rates in patients with intermediate B-cell lymphoma. Sinicrope et
al.(19) observed in
patients with colon cancer that obesity was associated with higher rates of overall
survival in men and that a lower BMI decreased survival in women. Given the
conflicting data, the guidelines provided to our patients still rely on the proposal
to maintain a BMI within the normal range.
Our comparative analysis revealed no association between education, income and BMI.
On the other hand, we demonstrated that education had a positive correlation with
income. Furthermore, our design allowed us to study the time elapsed between the
first symptoms and a definitive diagnosis. This variable was inversely correlated
with education, i.e., patients with less schooling took longer to receive a
definitive diagnosis. In this field of interpretation a few hypotheses can be
speculated: the patients may evaluate the symptoms and seek treatment in the SUS,
yet the basic primary healthcare system does not refer patients to specialized
clinics quickly enough or has not established a pattern of referrals to high
complexity services. Another plausible reason is that these patients do not have
adequate perception of the symptoms or their severity and therefore delay in seeking
specialized care. Moreover, as we mentioned previously, factors such as distance
from the centers of specialized treatment(9,10) and the
socioeconomic status of patients(14-16) can directly
influence the delay. In fact, we have often observed the two situations separately
or together, and unfortunately, both lead to a delay in receiving a proper diagnosis
which consequently worsens the chances of success of chemotherapy.
Overall, the incidence of adult acute myeloid leukemia increases with age ranging
from one case in every 100,000 inhabitants per year in the fourth decade of life to
ten cases per 100,000 inhabitants in over 70-year olds.(20) The occurrence of acute lymphoblastic leukemia
(ALL) is rarer in adults. Unfortunately, in Brazil there is no specific regional
data that allow comparisons with our findings on the prevalence and incidence. In
the current series we found a higher frequency of the M3 subtype and this finding is
similar to that reported for Brazilian patients.(21-24) During
the study period, there were only seven reported cases of ALL, thus preventing a
more detailed analysis.
Chronic lymphocytic leukemia affects 3.7 individuals per 100,000 inhabitants in the
United States and represents 0.8% of all cancers and 30% of the leukemias. It is a
disease that rarely affects individuals younger than 30 years of age. Neoplastic
lymphocytes usually present immunophenotype B and less than 2% of cases are of the T
lineage.(25) Epidemiologic
data on our population were not found in the literature, however Redaelli et
al.(26) reported an
incidence of around 10%.
The incidence of chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) in international registries is one to
two cases in 100,000 inhabitants, representing 15-20% of cases of leukemia in
adults. Usually the chronic stage of the disease is more common and has better
response to current treatment.(27)
Data published by the Ministry of Health estimated the incidence of chronic and acute
leukemia in Brazil in 2010 to be 4.8 cases per 100,000 inhabitants and in the State
of Sao Paulo at 5.3 per 100,000 (men and women).(1) Taking into account both acute and chronic leukemia
in our study we found 2.2 cases per 100,000 inhabitants over a period of six months.
If we estimate 4.4 cases per 100,000 inhabitants over one year, the incidence of
leukemia in the Vale do Paraiba is similar to that estimated for Brazil.
Hodgkin's lymphoma represents a sixth of all lymphomas and the estimates in several
regions of the world vary from 0.2 to 5.7 and from 0.1 to 4.9 per 100,000 men and
women, respectively.(28) In
Brazil, recent data from the Ministry of Health showed an estimated 2870 new cases
during 2009 with 1600 of those diagnosed being men and 1270 being women.(29) The nodular sclerosis histologic
type is the one most often found in literature.(30)
The estimated incidence for non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) varies widely among different
countries. Data from different regions of the world show values from 1.6 to 17.1
cases per 100,000 individuals annually for men and 0.7 to 11.7 cases per 100,000
individuals annually for women.(31) In Brazil the estimated incidence for 2008 reported by the
Ministry of Health was 9100 new cases; 4900 were men and 4200 were women.(32) The histological type of diffuse
large B-cell is most common among non-Hodgkin lymphomas followed by follicular
lymphomas.(31)
Multiple myeloma is the second most common hematologic malignancy. In the United
States, 14,500 new cases are diagnosed per year and there are approximately 45,000
individuals living with multiple myeloma. In Brazil there are no precise data on the
incidence and prevalence of multiple myeloma. As previously described,(33) most patients have advanced
disease including cases with irreversible renal failure.
Annually in the United States, more than 10,000 new cases of myelodysplastic
syndromes are diagnosed with estimated incidence rates of four cases per 100,000
inhabitants per year according to the Surveillance, Epidemiology and End Results
program (SEER).(34) In Brazil
there are no data to clearly show the incidence and prevalence rates in different
regions in order to make a comparison with our data.
In Brazil there are no data regarding the incidence and prevalence of
myeloproliferative disorders. Analyzed individually, essential thrombocythemia
gained prominence in recent years due to the findings concerning the molecular
changes of the JAK2 enzyme in its pathogenesis. The incidence of essential
thrombocythemia in the United States and Europe ranges from 0.6 to 2.5 per 100,000
inhabitants annually(35) but there
are no national data to compare. In a recent article on the diagnostic criteria and
clinical aspects of myeloproliferative neoplasms, based on international case
series, Chauffaille(36) described
an incidence of from 0.7 to 2.5 per 100,000 population per year for polycythemia
vera, 0.5 to 1.5 for myelofibrosis and 1 to 2 for essential thrombocythemia.
Finally, this study demonstrated several demographic characteristics of a group of
patients with oncohematological diseases in the Vale do Paraiba and
calculated prevalence and incidence rates of these diseases. We therefore believe
that similar studies should be encouraged in order to establish the profiles of
different regions. Such information may be relevant to the strategic planning of
health managers and enable the implementation of measures to improve the services
that treat patients with oncohematological diseases.
