[Abstract, Results, Discussion, Methods]

Scanning acoustic microscopy for characterization of neoplastic and inflammatory lesions of lymph nodes. A scanning acoustic microscope (SAM) imaging system calculates and color codes speed of sound (SOS). We evaluated the SAM results for lymph node imaging and compared these results with those of light microscopy (LM). SAM showed normal structures and localized/diffuse lesions of the lymph node. Our results revealed that as a rule, soft areas such as cystic necrosis presented less SOS while harder areas such as coagulative necrosis, granulomas, and fibrosis exhibited greater SOS. SOS increased according to stromal desmoplastic reactions and cellular concentration. In neoplastic lesions, statistically significant differences in SOS were observed among scirrhous carcinomas, lymphomas, and medullary carcinomas. SAM provided the following benefits over LM: (1) images reflected the tissue elasticity of each lesion, (2) digitized SOS data could be statistically comparable, (3) images were acquired in a few minutes without special staining, (4) SAM images and echographic images were comparable for clinical ultrasound imaging study.

Results
SAM imaging of normal LNs and reactive lymphadenitis
Figures 2A-C display LN images of normal and reactive lymphadenitis. The light microscopy images of H&E-stained tissue samples and their corresponding SAM images produced from SOS values through tissues are displayed.
Figure 2A displays a normal, small node, 3.0 mm in size comprising basic LN structures such as follicles, paracortex, medullary cords, and lymph sinus. All of these structures were well visualized by SAM imaging. The cell-rich structures such as follicles and paracortex revealed higher SOS values compared with those of the cell-poor structures such as medullary cord and sinus.
The germinal centers revealed slightly lower SOS values than those of the surrounding mantle zones (Figure 2B). The areas of the paracortex with high endothelial venules (HEV) were differentiated from the follicles and exhibited higher SOS values (Figure 2C).
At the hilar portion, many lymph and blood vessels run through the adipose tissue and converge in the hilum. In our imaging study, the muscular blood vessels and the collagenous capsule revealed the highest SOS values in normal LNs.
SAM images of granulomatous lymphadenitis in sarcoidal and tuberculous tissues
Sarcoidal granulomas were characterized by well-defined borders and a cohesive solid appearance8. The pinkish H&E-stained spotted granulomas demonstrated relatively higher SOS values compared with those of the surrounding lymphocyte-rich parenchyma (Figure 3A).
The tuberculous granulomas fused with each other to form confluent streams in H&E staining (Figure 3B). In SAM, non-necrotic granulomatous areas revealed higher SOS values compared with those of the intervening lymphoid cells. Some cell debris-rich, necrotic areas exhibited higher SOS values than those of the granulomatous area; however, the caseous necrotic areas with cystic changes revealed lower SOS values than those of the surrounding granulomatous or lymphocyte-rich areas (Figure 3C). The post inflammatory fibrous tissue surrounding granulomas fused to the outer capsule and revealed very high SOS values comparable to those of the skeletal muscles and debris-rich necrotic areas.
SAM imaging of malignant lymphoma
In cases of diffuse large B-cell lymphomas and Hodgkin lymphomas, the LNs were replaced by monotonous, large lymphoid cells and small lymphoid cells, respectively. The SAM images revealed corresponding homogenous masses with rather high SOS values (Figures 4A and 4B). Capsules were interrupted by lymphoid infiltrate that corresponded to the intermingled sound image; this image consisted of greater proportion of capsules and lesser proportion of lymphoma cells. An extracapsular invasive area into the adipose tissue revealed SOS values as high as those of the intracapsular area consisting of lymphoma cells (Figure 4A).
In follicular lymphomas, it was difficult to visualize normal LN structures except some vague follicular structures. In SAM images, we observed the corresponding nodular structures with lower SOS values and cell-rich margin of the lymphoma with higher SOS values, respectively (Figure 4C).
SAM imaging of metastatic carcinoma in LNs
The metastatic carcinoma section demonstrated focal differences in SOS by SAM. Adenocarcinoma with intranodal metastases from the stomach with scirrhous invasion revealed lower SOS values compared with those of the lymphocyte-rich follicular area (Figure 5A). The extracapsular invasive area with desmoplastic reactions extended to form a fibrous meshwork in the outer adipose tissue. These desmoplastic areas revealed SOS values as high as those of walls of the lymphatic vessels and the fibrous capsule.
Metastatic medullary carcinoma of the breast with scant stromal reaction (Figure 5B) demonstrated images contrasting with those of metastatic scirrhous carcinoma of the breast (Figure 5C). Moreover, the medullary carcinoma sections exhibited lower SOS values than the lymphocytes-rich follicular area, whereas the collagen-rich scirrhous carcinoma revealed higher SOS values than those of the lymphoid area.
Metastatic thyroid papillary carcinoma forming papillary and follicular structures demonstrated focal thyroglobulin colloids and revealed characteristic images by SAM; they exhibited higher SOS values, including spotty regions with even higher SOS values (Figure 5D). Papillary carcinoma demonstrated spicular-like desmoplastic reaction in areas where the SOS values were higher than those of the residual lymphoid tissue. The highest regions in the carcinoma corresponded to the thyroglobulin colloids.
Statistical analysis of LN lesions
Figures 6 and 7 present the SOS values (mean +- SD, m/s) for normal/reactive and neoplastic lesions of LNs, respectively. Factual data are summarized in Table 1. In the normal/reactive lesions, collagenous capsules and epithelioid granulomas had the highest SOS values followed by those of the mantle zones, hilar vessels, germinal centers, necrotic, and adipose tissues in that order. However, in neoplastic lesions, desmoplastic metastatic carcinoma exhibited significantly higher SOS values than those of all the other malignant lymphomas (P < 0.01*). In contrast, medullary carcinoma revealed significantly lower SOS values than all other lymphomas.

Discussion
The high resolution SAM images could discriminate normal structures of LN components such as follicles, paracortices, medullary cords, sinuses, capsules, and adjacent adipose tissues based on the differences in the SOS through each component. Our results revealed that as a rule, SOS through tissues increased with increasing concentration of fibrous components, such as collagen or muscle fibers and with nuclear density of the tissue as well.
In benign or reactive LNs, no specific fibrous components exist, except blood or lymphatic vessels and fibrous capsules. Lymphocyte-rich mantle zones exhibited higher SOS values in the cortex followed by the germinal centers with lower nuclear density. The nuclear density of the medulla was lower than that of the cortex; therefore, it revealed lower SOS values.
In sarcoidosis and tuberculosis, granulomas exhibited conspicuous masses with high SOS values in the SAM imaging. Necrotic areas exhibited either lesser or greater acoustic properties. Cystic necrosis with sparse cell density revealed lower SOS values and coagulation necrosis with cell-rich debris revealed higher SOS values than those of the adjacent granulomatous areas. In a pathology textbook9, tuberculous granulomas with central necrosis are referred to as "soft tubercles," whereas those without necrosis are referred to as "hard tubercles." Our SAM observations coincided with this description.
Most malignant lymphomas presented homogenous SAM images except for follicular lymphoma, which presented multiple nodular images. Normal components in the node disappeared and were replaced by monotonous lymphoma cells presenting uniform SOS values in the SAM images.
Metastatic carcinoma revealed focal characteristic SOS values differing from those of the normal lymphocytes. Scirrhous carcinoma with desmoplastic reaction exhibited significantly higher SOS values than those of all other types of lymphoma. In contrast, carcinoma with medullary growth presented significantly lower SOS values than those of all other lymphomas. Differences in SOS values among carcinomas may depend primarily on stromal fibrosis and not on the tumor itself. This means that the hardness of carcinomas depends on the degree of the desmoplastic stromal reaction.
Echography is a useful imaging tool in the assessment of LNs. Gray-scale sonography is widely used now in the evaluation of the number, size, shape, borders, matting, adjacent soft-tissue edema, and internal architectures of LNs10. Representative echographic images of LN lesions can be characterized by the following features: benign or reactive LNs are elliptical in shape with a short to long axes ratio < 0.5, hypoechoic with unsharp borders, and visible echogenic, intranodal hilar structures. Cystic necrotic areas correspond to echolucent areas in the LNs, and coagulation necrotic areas appear as echogenic areas in routine sonography11. Malignant lymphomas show multiple, enlarged hypoechoic masses with a "pseudocystic" appearance. Lymphomatous nodes are usually round, well defined, and without an echogenic hilum. Posterior enhancement echo images from adjacent adipose tissues are frequently observed. LNs with metastatic carcinomas are round and predominantly hypoechoic compared with the adjacent musculature. Visualizing the echogenic hilum was very difficult. Metastatic nodes with extracapsular spread demonstrate ill-defined borders. Metastatic papillary carcinomas of the thyroid were exceptionally hyperechoic, which may be related to intranodal deposition of thyroglobulin1213.
Observations of SAM imaging revealed that normal or reactive LNs were elliptical with hilar areas, whereas neoplastic nodes were round without apparent hilar structures. Normal or reactive LNs displayed heterologous SAM images corresponding to each structure. Neoplastic lesions displayed homogenous images because the tumors destroyed the normal structures and exhibited peculiar uniform SOS values; hence, the echograms of lymphomas and metastatic carcinomas demonstrated hypoechoic masses.
In the normal or reactive LNs, the borders of the LN parenchyma and adjacent connective tissue exhibited medullary cord and sinus structures having low SOS values gradually shifting to the surrounding adipose tissue that demonstrated the lowest SOS values in the section; thus, normal or reactive LNs presented unsharp borders. In contrast, neoplastic LNs displayed abrupt transition from the cell-rich area of the tumor, with higher SOS values, to the adjacent cell-poor area with lower SOS values; thus, the borders became sharp in the echogram. However, in lymphoma, there was a significant difference in acoustic impedance between the lymphoma and the surrounding adipose tissues, which resulted in posterior hyperechoic backscattered signals in the echogram. Interfaces between areas with significantly different acoustic impedances resulted in a greater degree of ultrasonic wave reflection.
Metastatic papillary carcinomas of the thyroid comprised spotty areas with either higher or lower SOS values corresponding to the thyroglobulins and cystic follicular spaces, respectively.
Although SAM has inferior resolution and a limited visual field compared with that of light microscopy, SAM provides the following benefits: (1) images reflected tissue elasticity of each lesion and disease, (2) SOS data could be statistically comparable among different lesions and diseases, (3) images were acquired in only a few minutes without special stainings and were obtainable even after staining, (4) SAM images in higher resolution and echographic images were comparable in the clinical ultrasonic imaging study.
In conclusion, the SAM system provided tissue elasticity imaging and succeeded in characteristic histological imaging of normal LN structures, granulomatous inflammation, and neoplastic lesions. SAM provided localized images of lymph follicles, germinal centers, medullary sinuses and cords, paracortex, fibrous capsules, adipose tissues, granulomas, necrosis, fibrosis, and metastatic carcinoma, in addition to diffuse images of follicular hyperplasia, diffuse malignant lymphomas, and follicular lymphomas. The SOS through each LN lesion was statistically comparable and useful for prediction of the histological findings.

Methods
Materials
All materials from anonymous donors were prepared from the Hamamatsu University Hospital archives. The research using stored samples without link to the identity of patients was approved by the research ethics committee of Hamamatsu University School of Medicine. Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded blocks were flat sectioned in 10-15 mm thick sections. Deparaffinized, unstained sections were soaked in distilled water for at least three hours to fully expand to the original state before observation. Continual sections were stained with H&E or Elastica-Masson stain for comparing SAM images with the corresponding light microscopy images.
Tissue samples
We examined and selected normal, inflammatory, and neoplastic lesions of lymph nodes including reactive lymphadenitis, granulomatous lymphadenitis such as sarcoidosis and tuberculosis, malignant lymphoma, and metastatic carcinoma of lymph nodes.
SAM observation
For SAM imaging, we used a scanning acoustic microscope supplied by Honda Electronics, Toyohashi, Japan with a 120-MHz transducer, which has a resolution of approximately 13 mm. SAM functions by directing focused sound from a transducer to a small area of the target object on a glass slide. The sound emitted by an acoustic transducer hits or penetrates the tissue and is reflected onto the surface of the tissue or glass. It is then returned to the detector, which is coincident with the transducer. The SOS through the tissue is calculated by comparing the time-of-flight of the pulse from the surfaces of both tissue and glass.
To perform SAM imaging, distilled water was applied between the transducer and the section as a coupling fluid. Air interferes with sound transmission. After mechanical X-Y scanning, sound speed from each point on the section was calculated and plotted on the screen to create two-dimensional, color-coded images. The region of interest (ROI: 1.2, 2.4, or 4.8 mm2) for acoustic microscopy was determined from the light microscopy images. Sound speed at 300 x 300 points was calculated and plotted on the screen to create the images, and sound data from 64 cross points on the lattice screen were used for statistical analysis.
Other data such as thickness of the section and attenuation of sound were also available from each point and shown on the screenshot (Figure 1B).
Statistical analysis
SOS data from each tissue element are presented as mean +- standard deviation (SD; m/s). Student's t-test was used for determining statistical differences among the specimens. The level of statistical significance was set to P < 0.01.
