[Abstract, Methods, Mixed]

Integrated genomic analysis identifies recurrent mutations and evolution patterns driving the initiation and progression of follicular lymphoma. Follicular lymphoma (FL) is an incurable malignancy1, with transformation to an aggressive subtype being a critical event during disease progression. Here we performed whole genome or exome sequencing on 10 FL-transformed FL pairs, followed by deep sequencing of 28 genes in an extension cohort and report the key events and evolutionary processes governing initiation and transformation. Tumor evolution occurred through either a 'rich' or 'sparse' ancestral common progenitor clone (CPC). We identified recurrent mutations in linker histones, JAK-STAT signaling, NF-kB signaling and B-cell development genes. Longitudinal analyses revealed chromatin regulators (CREBBP, EZH2 and MLL2) as early driver genes, whilst mutations in EBF1 and regulators of NF-kB signaling (MYD88 and TNFAIP3) were gained at transformation. Collectively, this study provides novel insights into the genetic basis of follicular lymphoma, the clonal dynamics of transformation and suggests that personalizing therapies to target key genetic alterations within the CPC represents an attractive therapeutic strategy.

ONLINE METHODS
Patient samples
Ten patients with FL were selected based on the availability of sequential tumor lymph node biopsies (a sample with FL and a subsequent sample with histological transformation to DLBCL (tFL)) and matched germline (GL) consisting of remission bone marrows or peripheral blood specimens. The clonality between each of the paired FL and tFL samples was confirmed by BCL2-IGH breakpoint analysis, as previously described38. Clinical characteristics of these patients are presented in Supplementary Table 1. Overall, 34 samples (10 paired FL/tFL/GL and 2 additional relapsed FL samples for case S2 and S7) were evaluated. An extension cohort of 22 additional paired FL/tFL and 100 independent FL cases were included in our validation experiments (Supplementary Table 8). All biopsies were previously histologically reviewed to confirm diagnosis and tumor content before DNA extraction from fresh frozen tumor samples. Tumor content was further estimated using the ABSOLUTE36 (version 1.0.4) and ASCAT39 (version 2.1) algorithms. Written consent was obtained for collection and use of specimens for research purposes with ethical approval obtained from the Institutional Review Board (10/H0704/65 and 06/Q0605/69).
Whole genome sequencing (WGS)
5mg of genomic DNA from matched tumor and GL samples were fragmented to average 300 bp insert-size libraries and sequenced using the HiSeq 2000 platform with paired-end reads of 100 bp, according to manufacturer's protocols (Illumina, San Diego, CA). Detailed coverage data for all cases are shown in Supplementary Table 2.
WGS read mapping and somatic mutation detection
Raw sequencing data were aligned to the reference human genome (hg19) using the Illumina ELANDv2 aligner. The alignments were sorted and converted into BAM format. PCR duplicates were removed, clusters of poorly aligned and anomalous reads were de-novo assembled into contigs using the CASAVA (v1.8) package (see URLs). We implemented the Strelka algorithm40 to identify somatic single nucleotide variants (SNVs) and indels for matched tumor-GL samples, selected for its sensitivity of mutation detection with varying tumor purities. After candidate indel detection and realignment, somatic variants were called and post-call filtering was performed. Only the somatic calls originating from homozygous reference alleles in the normal samples were considered. The joint somatic quality score Q >= 15 for SNVs and >= 30 for indels was applied for all post-filtering calls. The complete list of variants is detailed in Supplementary Table 4.
Whole exome sequencing and analysis
Capture libraries were constructed from 3mg of tumor and GL DNA using the Agilent SureSelectXT Human All Exon V4 kit. Enriched exome libraries were multiplexed and sequenced on the Illumina HiSeq 2500 to generate 100bp paired-end reads (Supplementary Table 2). Sequencing reads were aligned to the reference genome, using Burrows-Wheeler Aligner (BWA)41. SAM to BAM conversion and marking of PCR duplicates were performed using the Picard tools (version 1.86), followed by local realignment around indels and base quality score recalibration using the Genome Analysis Toolkit (GATK)42 (v2.3.9). Somatic SNVs and indels were identified using the Strelka pipeline.
Annotation and recurrently mutated genes
All post-filtered somatic SNVs and short indels were annotated using the SNPnexus tool43. The Ensembl database (v63) was used for gene/transcript identification and detection of amino acid changes. Any variants overlapping with common and GL polymorphisms present in the dbSNP 132 and the HapMap databases were masked. The allele frequencies for individual variants in both GL and tumor samples were measured by read counts. Somatic variants identified in both whole genome and exome sequencing is included in Supplementary Table 4.
Copy number and structural variant analyses from whole genome sequencing data
Copy number variants (CNV) were identified using VarScan244 (v2.3.5) with each tumor sample matched against GL. Samples were segmented using the circular binary segmentation (CBS) algorithm45 implemented in the R/Bioconductor package DNAcopy (v2.12), which allowed for undoing splits if the ratio between tumor and normal copy number was within 3 standard deviations. Structural variants were called using Pindel46 (v0.2.4t), with the exception of translocations, using the default parameters. Only calls that had zero supporting reads in the normal sample but >= 8 supporting reads in the tumor sample were retained. Translocations (fusion transcripts) were identified using DELLY47 and Breakdancer48 algorithms on paired-end reads only retaining SVs called by both methods, with >= 5 supporting reads in the tumor.
Identification of recurrent mutations in promoter regions
Based on the Ensembl gene/transcript annotation, the somatic variants in the region of -2,000 to +250 bp (within 5' UTR) relative to transcription start site (TSS) for each transcript of protein coding genes were identified across all WGS cases. Recurrently mutated promoter regions among multiple patients were identified and mutation hotspots in these regions were also noted (Supplementary Table 6).
Mutation and indel validation
SNVs and indels were confirmed by bidirectional Sanger sequencing, fluorescence-based fragment size analysis or targeted deep sequencing (Fluidigm-MiSeq), as detailed below (Supplementary Table 5). Concordance of selected variants called by WGS, WES and validation targeted deep sequencing with estimated VAFs are shown in Supplementary Fig. 14.
Phylogenetic analysis
Evolutionary trees were constructed for each of the 10 WGS/WES patients based on the distance matrix between GL, FL and tFL samples derived from the numbers of somatic variants (all variants, and nonsynonymous SNVs and indels) from each biopsy, using the Neighbor-Joining algorithm49 implemented in the PHYLIP package (see URLs). Once the consensus phylogenetic tree was determined, it was redrawn starting from GL leading to the putative CPC, then to FL and tFL samples, with the branch length proportional to the number of somatic changes i.e. genetic distance between the samples; and plotted against the clinical timelines.
High density SNP arrays
Copy number analysis and regions of copy neutral loss of heterozygosity (cnLOH, also known as acquired uniparental disomy, aUPD) was performed on a cohort of 26 paired FL-tFL and 3 diagnostic FL DNA samples (including 7 of our discovery cases) using the Affymetrix SNP 6.0 microarrays. Further details are given in the Supplementary Note.
Targeted resequencing
Twenty-eight candidate genes (Supplementary Table 8) were sequenced in the extension cohort cases using the Access Array(tm) platform (Fluidigm). All samples were screened in duplicate, with a number of matched GL and normal tonsil DNA included as controls in each run. The access array amplification was performed in a multiplex format using genomic DNA (50ng) according to the manufacturer's recommendation. The multiplexed library pools were deep sequenced using the Illumina MiSeq. After demultiplexing and FASTQ file generation of the raw data, reads were aligned to the reference genome using the BOWTIE2 algorithm50. SAMtools51 was used to generate sorted BAM files for each sample, and the VarScan 2 tool was used to examine the pileup file to call variants, including SNPs and short indels, implementing a minimum threshold variant allele frequency (VAF) of 5% and a Fisher's Exact Test p < 0.05. Only bases meeting the minimum base quality of 20 from reads meeting the minimum mapping quality of 20 were considered. A minimum read depth of 10 at a position was required to make calls and variants with >90% reads supporting one strand were excluded. Only concordant variants present in both duplicates or confirmed by independent Sanger sequencing were retained. Identified variants were annotated using SNPnexus to exclude those reported in dbSNP132 and to identify variants that had non-synonymous consequences or affected the splice sites.
Estimating clonality of mutations
Tumor purity, ploidy and absolute DNA copy numbers were determined from Affymetrix SNP6.0 data (n = 26 FL-tFL pairs and 3 diagnostic FLs) by implementing the ABSOLUTE algorithm (Supplementary Table 11). The ASCAT algorithm was also used to derive tumor purity and ploidy to ensure a high concordance across both algorithms (Supplementary Table 11). These estimates were used to compute and classify individual somatic mutations obtained from our deep sequencing analyses as clonal or subclonal, based on the posterior probability that the cancer cell fraction (CCF) exceeded 0.95, as previously reported52 (Supplementary Table 12).
Identification of recurrent targets of aberrant somatic hypermutation (aSHM)
SHM hotspots typically occur within the 2-kb window downstream of the transcription start site (TSS) and we have focused our analyses on these regions53. The total number of SNVs and the average mutation density across the 14 WGS tumor samples were investigated. For each gene, the ratio of transition to transversion mutations, ratio of mutations at C:G to A:T sites and the percentage of SNVs within the hotspot motif, WRCY, their associated p-values, and the SHM indicator were calculated in accordance to previous studies54. The probability of observing the number of SNVs or more for each target gene was calculated based on the Poisson distribution given the expected number of SNVs per SHM target region if those were uniformly randomly distributed in all target genes. A list of SHM gene targets is included in Supplementary Table 13.
EBF1 mutagenesis, retroviral expression and target gene analysis
Three FL-derived mutants (G171D and S238T localized within the DBD and R381S within the HLH domains) were generated to assess their ability to activate Ebf1 target gene expression. Ebf1-deficient pre-pro-B-cell lines (cultured on OP9 feeders in the presence of IL-7, Flt3 ligand and SCF) were transduced with wild-type or mutant Ebf1-GFP expressing bicistronic retroviruses as described previously34. GFP-positive cells were sorted 24 h after transduction and expression was confirmed by immunoblotting (data not shown). Total RNA was extracted using Trizol reagent (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Quantitative RT-PCR analysis was performed in triplicates on a 7500 Fast Real-Time PCR system (Applied Biosystems) using Power SYBR Green master mix to measure the mRNA expression of the Ebf1 target genes Igll1 and Cd79b33,34.
Generation of hH1c and hH1c/S102F overexpressing clones in H1c/H1d/H1e triple knockout embryonic stem cells (H1 TKO ESCs)
The FLAG-hH1c and FLAG-hH1c/S102F overexpression plasmids were constructed by replacing the mouse H1d coding sequence with FLAG-hH1c or FLAG-hH1c/S102F coding sequences in a 5-kb fragment encompassing the mouse H1d upstream and downstream regulatory sequences which were inserted into a vector containing a Blasticidin-resistant gene. Plasmid DNA (20mg) was transfected into 2x107 H1 TKO ESCs, as previously described55. A total of 48 clones (24 clones for each vector transfection) resistant to Blasticidin were picked and screened by immunoblotting using an anti-FLAG antibody (Sigma-Aldrich). Cell clones with the highest levels of FLAG-hH1c and FLAG-hH1c/S102F were selected for further analysis.
Preparation and analysis of histones
Chromatin was prepared from ESC and histones were extracted with 0.2 N sulfuric acid, according to previously described protocols56-58. Approximately 50mg of total histones was injected into a C18 reverse phase column (Vydac) on an AKTA UPC10 system (GE Healthcare). The effluent was monitored at 214 nm, and the peak areas were analyzed with AKTA UNICORN (v5.11) software. The A214 values of the H1 and H2B peaks were adjusted according to the respective peptide bonds, and the H1/nucleosome ratio was calculated, as previously described57-58.

Supplementary Material
Supplementary Note, Supplementary Figures 1-14, and Supplementary Table 1
Supplementary Tables 2-13
