[Abstract, Introduction, Mixed, Mixed, Mixed, Mixed, Discussion]

Pathophysiology and molecular aspects of diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma. Diffuse large B-Cell lymphoma is the most common subtype of non-Hodgkin lymphoma in the West. In Brazil, it is the fifth cause of cancer, with more than 55,000 cases and 26,000 deaths per year. At Hospital das Clinicas da Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de Sao Paulo - HCFMUSP, diffuse large B-Cell lymphoma represents 49.7% of all non-Hodgkin lymphoma cases. Initially, the classification of non-Hodgkin lymphoma was based on morphology, but advances in immunology and molecular medicine allowed the introduction of a biological classification for these diseases. As for other cancers, non-Hodgkin lymphoma involves patterns of multifactorial pathogenesis with environmental factors, as well as genetic, occupational and dietary factors, contributing to its development. Multiple lesions involving molecular pathways of B-cell proliferation and differentiation may result in the activation of oncogenes such as the BCL2, BCL6, and MYC genes and the inactivation of tumor suppressor genes such as p53 and INK4, as well as other important transcription factors such as OCT-1 and OCT-2. A dramatic improvement in survival was seen after the recent introduction of the anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody. The association of this antibody to the cyclophosphamide, hydroxydaunorubicin, oncovin and prednisolone (CHOP) regimen has increased overall survival of diffuse large B-Cell lymphoma and follicular lymphoma patients by 20%. However, 50% of all diffuse large B-Cell lymphoma patients remain incurable, creating a demand for more research with new advances in treatment. Thus, it is important to know and understand the key factors and molecular pathways involved in the pathogenesis of diffuse large B-Cell lymphoma.

Introduction
Non-Hodgkin lymphomas (NHLs) occur as a result of an expansion and progressive
accumulation of a mature single clone of lymphocytes(1). The most common subtype, diffuse large B-Cell lymphoma
(DLBCL), is characterized by a diffuse proliferation of large and mature B-cells. These
cells usually are larger than, or equal to, twice the normal size of macrophages or
lymphocytes(2).
DLBCL is clinically and biologically heterogeneous, aggressive, and includes several
subtypes(2). It may arise as
primary or de novo, or may result from a transformation of an indolent
lymphoma(3). The majority of
cases occur in lymph nodes with 40% in extranodal sites(4). These cases occur most frequently in the
gastrointestinal tract, but may appear in any organ, including the skin, central nervous
system (CNS), bone marrow (BM), salivary gland, lung, kidney, and liver(5,6). Bone marrow involvement is found in 11% to 27% of all cases but rarely
infiltrates the peripheral blood(7).
Initially, the classification of NHL was based on morphological features of the
malignant cell, but today it is also based on immunological and molecular data. Thus,
complementary techniques of immunohistochemistry, flow cytometry, cytogenetic,
polymerase chain reaction, and gene signature by microarray are used.
According to the World Health Organization (WHO)(7), DLBCLs may be subdivided intomorphological variants.
The centroblastic variant presents medium to large lymphoid cells, vesicular nuclei,
fine chromatin and scant cytoplasm. In some cases, it may feature cells with multiple
lobules and more than 90% of immunoblasts with a marked polymorphism. Shahi &
Manga(3) observed one to three
prominent basophilic nucleoli in some cases. Indeed, they suggest that this variant may
present two morphological subtypes. The first is called the monomorphic subtype, with
almost 100% of centroblasts, and the second, comprising of 10% of centroblasts and less
than 90% of immunoblasts, the polymorphic subtype(7).
In the immunoblast subtype, the cell population comprises more than 90% of immunoblasts.
It is characterized by cells with a single central nucleus and a basophilic and variable
cytoplasm, but less than 10% of centroblasts. Immunophenotyping and clinical
characteristics are essential to differentiate it from the plasmablastic variant of
DLBCL. According to Shahi & Manga(3), the plasmablastic variant represents 10% of all DLBCL and is more
common in immunosuppressed patients, especially those with HIV(7).
DLBCL rich in T-cells and histiocytes is formed by a high quantity of reactive T-cells
with or without histiocytes, and less than 10% of large neoplastic B-cells. The growth
pattern of this subtype of DLBCL is predominantly diffuse, with fine reticular fibers in
the tumor microenvironment. Immunophenotyping is essential to differentiate it from
classic Hodgkin lymphoma (cHL). This variant is rare and presents a worse
prognosis(6).
The anaplastic subtype is characterized by oval or polygonal cells with pleomorphic
nuclei. Cells may take on acohesive growth pattern, such as that found in carcinoma, or
a sinusoidal growth pattern. The malignant cells express the CD30(ki-1) antigen and the
main differential diagnoses are Hodgkin's lymphoma (HL) and T-cell NHL that express
CD30(6).
Primary Central Nervous System (CNS) DLBCL represents all cases of intra-cerebral or
intraocular lymphomas and corresponds to less than 1% of NHL cases and 2-3% of all brain
tumors. The average age at incidence is 60 years. The clinical characteristics are
neurological disorders as observed in 80% of patients. Neuropsychiatric symptoms are
observed in 20 to 30% and high intracranial pressure may also be observed(7).
Primary cutaneous DLBCL (leg type) represents 4% of all primary cutaneous DLBCL, and 20%
of all primary cutaneous B-cell lymphomas. It occurs in elderly women in the seventh
decade of life. It usually affects the legs but in 10 to 15% may occur in other
sites(7).
Epstein-Barr Virus (EBV)-positive DLBCL of the elderly is a clonal proliferation of
large B-cells. Its incidence is more common after the fifth decade of life and in
patients with no previous immunodeficiency. Other rare subtypes of DLBCL are
lymphomatoid granulomatosis and primary effusion lymphoma.
DLBCL associated with chronic inflammation is a lymphoid neoplasm associated with EBV.
The mean time elapsed between chronic inflammation and lymphoma is 10 years. Diagnosis
occurs between the fifth and eighth decades of life with a median age of 65 years. The
most common sites of involvement are the pleural cavity, femur and periarticular tissue.
The tumor mass is greater than 10 cm in more than half of all cases. There is direct
invasion of adjacent structures, but the tumor is often limited to the thoracic cavity
until diagnosis. About 70% of patients present clinical stage I or II(7).
Unclassifiable B-cell lymphomas with features intermediate between DLBCL and Burkitt
Lymphoma (BL)are aggressive lymphomas that, owing to their clinical and biological
characteristics, may not be included in one of these two categories. In most cases,
morphological characteristics are intermediate, with cells smaller than in typical DLBCL
and larger than in typical BL but the phenotype of cells is compatible with BL. This
lymphoma is rare in adults and more than half the patients show extranodal disease, such
as bone marrow and peripheral blood involvement(7).
B-cell lymphomas with features intermediate between DLBCL and cHL are common in young
males (20 to 40years). Etiology is unknown and the most common site of involvement is
the mediastinum, with or without the involvement of lymph nodes(7).
Studies of gene expression patterns divided DLBCL into three subtypes that are
morphologically indistinguishable: activated B-cell DLBCL, germinal center DLBCL, and
primary mediastinal B-cell lymphoma. They express distinct genes that have been found at
different stages of B-cell differentiation(8).

Epidemiology
DLBCL represents 80% of all aggressive lymphomas(3) and 30 to 40% of all NHL cases in the West and are one of the
most frequent in developing countries(2). At the Hospital das Clinicas da Faculdade de Medicina da
Universidade de Sao Paulo -HCFMUSP, DLBCL represents 49.57% of all NHL
cases(9). NHL is the fifth most
common type of cancer in Brazil, with an incidence of 55,000 cases and over 26,000
deaths per year(10). In Sao
Paulo, in 1998, the incidence of NHL cases was 12.2/100 thousand inhabitants(11). Likewise, DLBCL is the most common
lymphoma in adults (31%), followed by follicular lymphoma (FL)(12-14). The median age at incidence is 70 years and it predominates in
males (55%)(12).
According to Friedberg (12), the
incidence of DLBCL has been increasing by 3 to 4% per year in both genders, in white and
non-white populations, and in all age groups, except for adolescents. Factors such as
more sensitive diagnostic techniques, changes in the classification of
lymphoproliferative disorders and, particularly, the increase of NHL in HIV patients
have contributed to the escalation in the incidence of this disease.
Environmental factors, as well as genetic, occupational and dietary factors, may have
contributed to the development of NHL(15). NHLs are associated with chronic inflammatory diseases such as
Sjogren syndrome, celiac disease and rheumatoid arthritis. Indeed, infectious
agents are also related to the pathogenesis, but no greater incidence of NHL has been
found in individuals who handle organic solvents, organophosphates, benzene or carbon
tetrachloride(16).
In DLBCL, factors such as ultraviolet radiation, pesticides, and hair dye are
potentially associated with higher risk. In addition, immunosuppression, especially
related to HIV, is a risk factor and it may be associated with Epstein-Barr
virus(13).

Pathophysiology
DLBCL arises from mature B-cells at different stages of differentiation. Several gene
mutations promote changes in B-cells, changing the gene expression and promoting a
neoplastic transformation (Figure 1)(17).
Figure 1
Diagram of the differentiation and maturation of normal B lymphocytes and possible
molecular alterations that can lead to the pathogenesis of diffuse large B-Cell
lymphoma Guilherme et al.(17) -
adapted by the authors.
During B lymphocyte ontogeny, after leaving the bone marrow, those cells travel to
secondary lymphoid tissues where they will find their respective antigens promoting the
development of secondary follicles. An antigen-dependent phase of B-cell development
occurs at this site. In the germinal center of the secondary follicle, these lymphocytes
are transformed into centroblasts that have a high rate of proliferation, while frequent
and continuous somatic mutations of genes of the immunoglobulin variable chain occur,
promoting maturation and differentiation into centro cytes and subsequently intoplasma
cells or in memory B-cells(17). In the
germinal center, the BCL2 gene expression is usually down regulated and
BCL6 is hyperexpressed(8,17).

Molecular Events Involved in DLBCL Pathogenesis
Proto-oncogenes are important to control cell proliferation. However, when
inappropriately activated by genetic abnormalities such as chromosomal translocations,
genemutations or amplification, the cells may acquire a malignant transformation. In
contrast, tumor suppressor genes promote cell differentiation and decreased cell
proliferation. In the malignant transformation process, oncogene activation and
inhibition of the tumor suppressor genes usually occur. Similar to other cancers, the
pathogenesis of DLBCL occurs in multiple steps that results in the development of the
disease (Figure 2)(1,14,18).
Figure 2
Main genetic lesions that occur in the pathogenesis of diffuse large B-Cell
lymphoma (DLBCL) and their respective frequencies. Lossos(14) - adapted by the authors.
As previously described, the B lymphocyte ontogeny occurs in the bone marrow and in
peripheral lymphoid tissues and depends on various genetic recombinations that function
as points of vulnerability, subject to deleterious events that affect the immune system
and the individual. However, in most cases, protective mechanisms surmount these
disorders and the physiological homeostasis is preserved resulting in the formation of
immunologically perfect B-cells. Examples of important genetic events that are essential
in the development of B-cells are the recombination of genes encoding the heavy Ig
chains driven by the RAG1 and RAG2 genes, and the
hypermutation of variable regions of the genes responsible for encoding the light Ig
chains and the switch of the Ig class(1,8).
The BCL6 gene is one of the most frequently affected in DLBCL. On the
other hand, the t(14;18), which juxtaposes the BCL2 oncogene located on
chromosome 18 to the promoter region of the gene encoding the heavy Ig chain on
chromosome14, results in an overexpression of the BCL2 protein, a condition found in 15%
to 30% of all DLBCL cases(14,19-22).

Main oncogenes involved in the pathogenesis of DLBCL
BCL2
The BCL2 gene, which encodes an anti-apoptotic protein located in
the outer membrane of the mitochondria and cytoplasm, plays an important role in the
pathogenesis of NHL. This protein is involved in mechanisms related to resistance to
chemotherapy(23-25). Amen et al.(26) demonstrated higher overall survival
and disease-free survival in DLBCL with no BCL2 and Cyclin D2 expression. However,
other authors have demonstrated a negative effect of the expression of BCL2 only in
the subgroup of activated B-cell DLBCL(22-25,27).
BCL6 Gene
The BCL6 gene is a proto-oncogene located on chromosome3q27
expressed on normal B-cells in the germinal center(28-30). The BCL6
protein blocks genes involved in cell cycle progression and response to DNA
damage(8). Chromosomal
translocations involving the BCL6 gene occur in 30% to 40% of tumors
and arise from disorders in the sequence in the promoter region of DNA. The role of
the BCL6 gene in the pathogenesis of DLBCL was recently elucidated.
Alterations in BCL6 protein expression may cause failure in cell differentiation and
continuous activation and cell proliferation. Consequently, it promotes a higher cell
survival and genetic instability that contributes to malignant
transformations(14).
Main tumor suppressor genes related to the pathogenesis and prognosis of DLBCL
p53 Gene
The p53 gene is located on chromosome 17, encoding a nuclear
phosphoprotein p53. This protein acts by regulating the DNA transcription, cell
proliferation and apoptosis(28).
Sixty percent of malignant human tumors and 30% of B-celllymphomas present the
p53 mutation. Most of them occur in exons 5 and 9 and affect
their function in the control of the DNA repair. Patients with absent or mutated
p53 present more aggressive disease and worse
prognosis(31). Some
studies have suggested that p53 may be inactivated by the
BCL6 gene during the genesis of lymphoma(14).
MYC Gene
MYC gene mutations may occur in regions of exons and
introns(14). Recombination
of the MYC gene with other genes can be found in 2% to 16% of
DLBCL cases, especially in extranodal lymphomas. It is associated with lower
complete remission and worse overall survival rates(12).
Main transcription factors in the pathogenesis and prognosis of DLBCL
The differentiation and proliferation of B-cells are controlled by transcription
factors (32). Two of these factors
are the OCT-1 and OCT-2 proteins that belong to the POU family and are linked to
genes involved in B-cell regulation(33).
The OCT-2 protein is little expressed in pre-B-cells, T-cells, myelomonocytic and
epithelial cells. However, it is strongly expressed in mature B-cells. On the other
hand, the OCT-1 protein is highly expressed in pre-B-cells, suggesting that it may be
involved in the early phase of B-cell development(33).
Recent studies have demonstrated, through the RNA interference technique, that OCT
factors influence the survival of cells in lymphomas with the t(14; 18). A positive
correlation was found between OCT, BOB1 and BCL2 expressions. OCT-2 activates the
promoter of the BCL2 gene and is involved in the malignant
transformation in B lymphomas. The low expressions of OCT-1,OCT-2 and BOB1 are
inversely proportional to apoptosis(34).

Conclusions
DLBCL is the most common subtype of NHL and only 40 to50% of all adult patients are
cured. Knowledge of the malignant cell biology has promoted an increase in the overall
survival rate. However, this knowledge is incipient and many other studies of the gene
expression of malignant cells and the tumor microenvironment are necessary. The advance
in molecular biology techniques has been essential and its continuous improvement is
fundamental to achieve maximum understanding of the biology. The final goal is to
translate the knowledge of the biology of DLBCL into new options of therapy to try to
improve patient survival.
