[Abstract, Introduction, Mixed, Mixed, Mixed, Discussion]

Mycosis fungoides and S?zary syndrome: clinical, histopathological
and immunohistochemical review and update*. This paper reviews the diagnostic and classificatory concepts of mycosis fungoides and Sezary syndrome in light of the latest normative publications. It describes the great variability of the clinical expression of mycosis fungoides in its early stages as well as the histopathological and immunohistochemical aspects that help with diagnosis. The diagnostic criteria required for characterizing Sezary syndrome and the staging system used for both mycosis fungoides and Sezary syndrome are described.

INTRODUCTION
Concept: primary cutaneous lymphomas
Primary cutaneous lymphomas (PCL) are defined as non-Hodgkin lymphomas. They are
found in the skin without an extra primary cutaneous location at the moment of diagnosis.1 The current PCL classification is a result of the cooperation between the
World Health Organization (WHO) and the European Organization of Research and
Treatment of Cancer (EORTC), published in 2005 under the title "WHOEORTC
Classification for Cutaneous Lymphomas", and largely referenced and disseminated
in 2008 in the publication by the WHO titled "WHO Classification of Tumors of
Haematopoietic and Lymphoid Tissues".2
The WHO-EORTC classification distinguishes between two large PCL groups: lymphomas
from T lymphocytes with residence in the skin, referred to as "cutaneous T-cell
lymphomas" (CTCL), and those from B-lymphocytes, referred to as "cutaneous
B-cell lymphomas" (CBCL). In addition, there are cutaneous lymphomas from
Natural Killer cells (NK) and groups of temporarily unclassifiable lymphomas with
undefined phenotypic characteristics.1,2
CTCLs comprise a group of heterogeneous lymphomas with a clinical behavior that is
distinct from that of systemic lymphomas, including those with a similar histological
subtype. Even among themselves, CTCLs vary widely, from patches to tumors, from
indolent to aggressive. They also vary in their biological behavior, in their
histological and immunophenotypic aspects and, consequently, in prognosis and
survival. 1-5
Indolent CTCL subtypes include mycosis fungoides (MF) and its variants, anaplastic
large T-cell PCL, lymphomatoid papulosis, subcutaneous panniculitis-like T-cell
lymphomas with alpha/beta T-cell phenotype, and cutaneous lymphomas of T CD4+ cells
of small and medium-sized pleomorphic cells. Aggressive subtypes include
Sezary Syndrome (SS), PCL such as nasal-type T/NK-cell, T CD4- and CD8+ cells,
unspecific T-cell and the T cell lymphoma/leukemia of adults. Among PCL, more than
65% are of the T-cell type, 25% are formed by B cells and 10% are unspecific.
1-5
Concept: mycosis fungoides
The predominant CTCL subtype is mycosis fungoides. It corresponds to the cutaneous
lymphoma originated in the peripheral epidermotropic T-lymphocyte, which expresses
the T-cell receptor (TCR) with ab+subunits and
CD4+ immunophenotype, known as memory T-lymphocyte
(CD45RO+), and constitutes the skin immunosurveillance. 2,5 The designation MF can only be used for classic cases characterized by the
development of patches, plaques and tumors and for variants with a similar clinical
course. 2 MF represents less than 1% of the total number of non-Hodgkin lymphomas;
however, it is the most common cutaneous lymphoma. It usually has an indolent course
and good prognosis when identified in its early stages. 1-5
The classic form of MF, which is also referred to as Alibert-Bazin, and three
variants, namely, the "folliculotropic", "pagetoid reticuloid"
and "granulomatous cutis laxa" variants, are acknowledged in the WHO-EORTC
classification and in the WHO Classification of Tumors of Haematopoietic and Lymphoid Tissues.1,2 Other subtypes have been reported in the literature due to their peculiar
clinical, demographic or histological characteristics:
"hypopigmented/hyperpigmented", "erythrodermic",
"poikilodermic", "pigmented purpura-like",
"bullous/dyshidrotic", "papular" and even the
"invisible" subtype. 5 The leukemic MF subtype is referred to as SS, with distinct clinical and
evolutive expressions.1-7
Historical aspects
In 1806, MF was first described in France by Alibert, who named it in 1814 "Pian
fungoides". The term "mycosis fungoides " was only adopted by Alibert
in 1832.5 In 1870, Bazin described its evolution according to the natural history of the
disease and defined its stages. Such description is classic and has been used to this
date: patch, plaque, tumoral and systemically disseminated.
In 1885, Vidal and Brocq introduced the term "mycosis fungoides
d'emblee" for cases of cutaneous lymphomatous
tumorations virtually from the beginning, without precursor lesions. 1 Currently, this old MF clinical subtype corresponds to the "unspecific
peripheral cutaneous T-cell lymphoma" and is no longer considered an MF variant.
1.2,6
In 1892, the erythrodermic form of MF was described. It is characterized by erythema,
scaling and generalized infiltration of the skin. In 1938, the description of
Sezary syndrome was made. 1 "Pagetoid reticulosis" was described in 1931 as
"Ketro-nGoodman's disease", which would correspond to the generalized form
of pagetoid reticulosis, and, in 1939, solitary hyperkeratosis was described by
Woringer-Kolopp. The Ketron-Goodman subtype is no longer considered pagetoid
reticulosis and probably corresponds to the aggressive epidermotropic CD8+ cutaneous
T-cell lymphoma.8
In 1968, "lymphomatoid papulosis" was described by Macaulay as a benign
clinical form of CTCL that develops in outbreaks, despite its malignant morphological
aspect on histopathological examination. 9 The immunophenotype of lymphomatoid papulosis corresponds to CD3+,
CD45RO+ and CD30+. 10
The denomination "cutaneous T-cell lymphoma" (CTCL) was used for the first
time in 1975 to include MF and its variants, and it later included other PCL types
and the spectrum of CD30+ PCL, primary subcutaneous panniculitis-like
T-cell lymphomas, nasal-type NK/T-cell PCL, and non-classifiable T-cell
PCL.5-7
In 2007, the International Society for Cutaneous Lymphoma (ISCL) and the EORTC
published a review of the staging and specific classification of MF and SS. The
review modified the staging system and provided an accurate definition of SS, in
particular. 6
Epidemiological aspects
Primary cutaneous lymphomas are the second most frequent extranodal non-Hodgkin
lymphomas; they are preceded by gastrointestinal lymphomas. PCL show an estimated
annual incidence in Europe of 1/100,000 inhabitants. 1,2
In contrast to nodal non-Hodgkin lymphomas, which are mostly of the B type, T-type
lymphomas predominate in the skin. They correspond to 65%-80% of the total PCL
diagnosed in Europe. 11 MF and its variants correspond to more than 50% of the cases of PCL and to
approximately 90% of the total number of T-cell lymphomas.1,2,11 In the United States, from 1973 to 1992, the incidence of MF was 0.36
cases/100,000 inhabitants.11 Incidence of the disease was higher in the black population compared to
Caucasians, at a proportion of 1.7/1. The proportion between Asians and whites was 0.6/1.12 In the period studied, the mortality rate decreased for MF cases specifically,
and this was considered a result of early diagnosis.11
In a study conducted in Switzerland from 1990 to 2009, 263 PCL cases were identified.
The mean age of the patients was 59 years, and the male/female ratio was 1/1.4.12 CTCLs added up to 190 cases (72.2%), and MF corresponded to 60% (114/190) of
these cases. In the period studied, the incidence of MF was stable, and SS decreased
from 17% to 7% of cases. The incidence of CD30+ lymphomas increased from 7% to 18% of
the total number of cases.12
In Brazil, data from the National Institute of Cancer (Instituto Nacional do
Cancer- INCA) indicate an estimated incidence of 9,640 new cases in 2012
(5,190 in males and 4,450 in females) for the group of extranodal non-Hodgkin
lymphomas, which is equivalent to approximately 5.0/100,000 inhabitants. This
estimate includes PCL; however, the INCA publication does not distinguish between the
different subtypes of PCL.13
MF particularly affects male and female adults, with an M/F ratio between 1.6 and
2/1. These individuals are usually older than 50 years, but incidence has increased
in children and adolescents. 1,2,5
The survival percentage in the fifth year of follow-up ranges from 16% to 100%,
depending on clinical CTCL subtype, and from 80% to 100% when MF and its variants are
considered, except for SS, which shows a reserved prognosis. 2,5-7

MYCOSIS FUNGOIDES AND SEZARY SYNDROME. CLINICAL ASPECTS
Mycosis fungoides
It is a neoplasia of lymphocytes, generally of the CD4+ phenotype, and a
cytokine production pattern with Th2 profile. Other phenotypes associated with
typical MF are CD8+, CD56+ and the double negative,
CD4-and CD8-. Classic MF follows some clinical stages that
are used to identify the disease and its staging. In the early phases, diagnosis is
difficult, and the disease mimics different clinical conditions, such as chronic
eczema, psoriasis, parapsoriasis, sclero-atrophic lichen, chronic lichenoid
pityriasis, pityriasis alba, atopic dermatitis, leprosy, chloracne (MF follicular
subtype) and, by analogy, those of other cutaneous lymphomas.5,7 In this phase, clinical and histological aspects may be unspecific and the
disease evolves for years without a diagnosis.
The early lesions, when fully established, correspond to patches (Figures 1 and 2), which are referred to as "plaques" in the
French literature and described as erythematous-scaling plaques in the textbook
entitled Dermatologia by Sampaio & Rivitti.14 They resemble psoriasis or parapsoriasis, which has led to semantic confusions
and difficulty with the definition and characterization of the early stage of MF. 14,15
FIGURE 1
Mycosis fungoides - patch: erythematous, atrophic and slightly hyperkeratotic
lesion on the gluteal region
FIGURE 2
Mycosis fungoides - patch: hypochromic and atrophic lesion on the thorax
The early clinical aspect of the disease is that of a patch-like lesion with a slight
erythematous, pinkish or brownish coloration, or hypochromic, with thin scaling and,
at times, with slight atrophy (Figures 1 and
2). Single or multiple lesions of different
diameters and locations develop, often in covered areas and particularly in the
gluteal region and on the root of the thighs. In certain cases, the lesion is
poikilodermic, with mottled patches with hyper and hypopigmentation, lichenification
and telangiectasias. Pruritus generally varies from mild to moderate. These lesions
may remain stable for years, go into remission or indolently progress to plaque
stage.
The main differential diagnosis in this phase is parapsoriasis, which presents
clinical and histological superposition with MF. In this context, two types of
parapsoriasis must be distinguished: small and large plaques that were generically
defined by Brocq in 1902 1 as chronic, recurrent, erythematous scaling lesions comparable to
"eczematoid, psoriasiform and lichenoid lesions".
Although they are referred to as plaque parapsoriasis, the lesions are, in fact, of
the patch-type. The distinction between "small-plaque" parapsoriasis and
"large-plaque" parapsoriasis is based on clinical and histopatological
correlation. Small plaques have a smaller diameter with a digitiform aspect. They are
usually located on the trunk and do not present atrophy or telangiectasia. 16 Lesions are 2 to 6 cm in diameter, but they can reach 10 to 20 cm in length,
and this is why they are referred to as "digitiform" 16 Histologically, "small-plaque" parapsoriasis is characterized by
unspecific alterations, such as spongiosis, psoriasiform or lichenoid pattern with
exocytosis of small lymphocytes. Currently, it is consensual that
"small-plaque" parapsoriasis shows minimum or even no potential to become MF.16
"Large-plaque" parapsoriasis presents with lesions that are larger than 6 cm in
diameter, and they frequently show signs of atrophy and poikilodermia. They are
located on the gluteal region, trunk, root of the thighs, internal part of the arms
and mammary region. Histologically, the pattern resembles that of
"small-plaque" parapsoriasis; however, the infiltrate contains lymphocytes
with cerebriform nuclei, similarly to what is observed in MF. 16-20
"Large-plaque" parapsoriasis progresses to frank MF in around 7.5% to 14% of cases.16,17 Sanchez and Ackerman (1979) suggested that "large-plaque"
parapsoriasis must be understood as a synonym for MF in its early stage. 18 King-Ismael and Ackerman (1992) reported that even "small-plaque"
parapsoriasis is the early manifestation of MF, which is not accepted by other
authors. 19,20
Other dermatoses are possible differential diagnoses of MF, particularly chronic
eczema of undefined etiology, which is little responsive to appropriate therapy.
These cases frequently remain under clinical suspicion of MF for a long time until
accurate diagnostic definitions are made.
In the plaque stage, lesions individually show clear infiltration and increased
diameter, and new lesions appear (Figure 3).
There is a tendency for lesions to take an annular, polycyclic or horseshoe-shaped
aspect; they seem to be infiltrated at palpation and to have well-demarcated edges
and asymmetrical distribution. They may also affect the face and the scalp.
Occasionally, plaque lesions may ulcerate prior to becoming tumor-like lesions. 21,22
FIGURE 3
Mycosis fungoides - plaque: erythemato-violaceous lesion with mild
hyperkeratosis localized on the inguino-crural region
They change from an erythematous pinkish to erythematous purplish or brownish color,
with scaling of variable intensity. Pruritus tends to be more intense than in the
patch stage. Patients may remain in this stage indefinitely, go into remission for an
indefinite period or progress to tumor stage. 21,22
Clinical differential diagnosis in this phase is made with diseases showing cutaneous
infiltration; other cutaneous lymphomas, whether primary cutaneous lymphomas or not,
are noteworthy, namely, cutaneous sarcomas and infectious dermatoses with emphasis on
leprosy, which can simulate infiltrated MF lesions, infectious dermatoses caused by
fungi and even tumic lupus erythematosus. The histological diagnosis is more
sensitive and more specific in this phase than in the patch phase, with frank
epidermotropism and the presence of Pautrier's abscesses.
In the tumor stage, lesions have a papular or nodular aspect, with
erythematous-purplish coloration and possible progression to large-diameter lesions
(Figure 4). In this phase, it is not
uncommon to find the coexistence of patches and plaque-type lesions. Lesions tend to
be multiple and accompanied by cutaneous infiltration which, when located on the
face, render a lion-like facial aspect. 22 In addition to the face, preferential sites are the axillary, inguinocrural,
inframammary and antecubital regions. However, uncommon sites may be affected, such
as the oral and genital mucosae. 5
FIGURE 4
Mycosis fungoides: tumoral lesion appearing over a previous patch-type lesion
on the leg
It is noteworthy that patients in the tumor stage and with clinical remission
following treatment may relapse under the form of patches and plaques or even tumors.
The development of patches is usually the first sign of disease recurrence. In these
circumstances, the natural history of the disease shows a faster course and new
tumors will be soon present.5
Lymphonodal or visceral dissemination does not occur in the patch stage; it is rare
in the plaque stage, but becomes relatively frequent in the tumor stage. 2,21 Regional lymph nodes are the first areas to be affected, and
visceral compromising may occur in various organs, such as spleen, liver and lungs,
although the bone marrow is rarely affected. 2,5,7
MF transformation into the anaplastic variant of large CTCL CD30+ cells has been
reported among 8% to 55% of tumor-phase MF cases. 5-7
CD30+ lymphomas secondary to MF show a reserved prognosis with mean
survival of 11 to 36 months. 2,5-7
Sezary syndrome
Sezary Syndrome corresponds to 3% of all cutaneous lymphomas, and it is
characterized by a triad of manifestations: erythrodermia with pruritus,
limphonodomegalia and atypical circulating lymphocytes (referred to as Sezary
or Lutzner cells). 5,22,23 Associated clinical manifestations include lagophthalmos, alopecia,
palmoplantar hyperkeratosis and onycodystrophy. Erythrodermia may be the progression
of previous patches and plaques, developing from idiopathic erythrodermia or emerging
de novo.5,22,23
Patients are usually elderly. The clinical aspects of erythrodermia in SS are not
very distinguishable from those of erythrodermia associated with other diseases,
except in certain cases, as it is less desquamative and shows more infiltration than
the others. 24 However, in its early stages, SS is indistinguishable solely on clinical bases
and must be differentiated from erythrodermia of eczematous origin, psoriasis and
pharmacodermia. 23,24
It is interesting to note that SS must be differentiated from erythrodermia in MF
progression. In the WHO-EORTC classification, MF and SS are listed as independent
diseases, and patients with a previous history of MF who develop erythrodermia are
diagnosed as having an erythrodermic form of MF instead of SS.1,2,5-7,24
Nevertheless, some authors suggest that these cases must be classified as
"MF-preceded SS". 24
Although the syndrome is understood as a leukemic phase of T-cell cutaneous
lymphomas, bone marrow compromising is rare, and it is only found in advanced forms
of the disease. 25
The diagnostic criteria for the syndrome, as recommended by ISCL-EORTC and
countersigned in the WHO Classification of Tumors of Haematopoietic and Lymphoid
Tissues, are that the circulating monoclonal lymphocyte population should be
identified by molecular or cytogenetic methods and there should be an identity
between the circulating T-lymphocyte clone and the clone presented in the skin, in
addition to one of the following: at least 1,000 Sezary cells per mm3 of peripheral blood, an increased population of
CD4+/CD7-in peripheral blood with remarkable predominance of
CD4+ cells in relation to CD8+(CD4/CD8 ratio > 10),
Sezary cells with a diameter > 14 um representing > 20% of the
circulating lymphocytes and, some markers like CD2, CD3, CD4 and CD5 must be absent. 1,2,5,22,23
The staging system used for MF is also used for SS, and by definition the syndrome is
classified in stage III from the beginning. SS prognosis is poor, with a mean
survival of 2 to 4 years. 6 Both MF and SS patients have an increased chance of developing a second
malignant neoplasia and even a second lymphoma. The opposite also seems to be true,
that is, patients with a type-B lymphoma may develop type-T MF or SS more frequently
than the general population.5,6,22

MYCOSIS FUNGOIDES. Clinical variants described in the "WHO-EORTC Classification
for Cutaneous Lymphomas" and "WHO Classification of Tumors of Haematopoietic
and Lymphoid Tissues"
Follicular/folliculotropic mycosis fungoides
Folliculotropic mycosis fungoides has been classified as an entity that is separated
from the classic form because of its clinical and histological characteristics and
refractoriness to treatment. 2,5,22 It is described in the literature under different designations:
folliculotropic, follicular, pylotropic, folliculocentric and follicular mucinosis.2,5,22,26-33 Some
authors understand that the latter must be distinguished from follicutropic MF;
however, most authors agree that both belong to the spectrum of clinical and
histopathological manifestations of follicular MF. 26-30
Some publications refer that folliculotropic mycosis fungoides occurs mainly in females.27,36 Lesions initially show an acneiform or comedo-like aspect, or one with milia
en plaque, follicular papules, follicular keratosis, erythematous
plaques, papular or alopecic plaques (alopecia mucinosa), including mucin secretion (mucinorrhea).5,26-33
The preferential locations for clinical lesion onset are the face, neck and upper
trunk, and pruritus is moderate to intense. One third of the cases affect the eyebrow
with follicular prominence and the possibility of alopecia. Severe compromising of
the pilous follicle with follicular hyperplasia may result in the formation of
lesions with a tumor aspect, even in the absence of an actual tumor, thus
corresponding to pseudotumoral MF. 30
The differential diagnoses of folliculotropic MF must be diseases that progress with
cyst formation, pseudocomedos and plaques, such as chloracne, nevus comedonicus,
granulomatous rosacea and facial granuloma. 26-33
Microscopically, folliculotropic MF expresses a dense lymphocytic infiltrate, which
surrounds and infiltrates the pilous follicle and usually spares the epidermis in
interfollicular space. In approximately 10% of cases, there is epidermotropism and
folliculotropism. 5,26-30 The infiltrate
consists of small and mediumsized lymphocytes with irregular nuclei and formation of
Pautrier's microabscesses inside the follicular epithelium. 33,34 The follicles classically show a corneous plug and, at times, epithelial mucin
degradation with variable intensity.30-33
Evidence indicates that the prognosis of folliculotropic MF is worse than that of the
classic form. The survival rate is 26% in 10 years of follow-up, and with regard to
staging, a diagnosis of folliculotropic MF would implicate considering that the
patient belongs to stage III, regardless of the clinical appearance of the lesion at
diagnosis. 6,30,33
Pagetoid reticulosis (Woringer-Kolopp type)
Pagetoid reticulosis is considered an MF variant due to its clinical, evolutive and
anatomopathological characteristics. The term pagetoid reticulosis must be reserved
for localized lesions known as Woringer-Kolopp disease, which was described in 1939. 8 Ketron-Goodman disease, described in 1931, was previously considered a
generalized form of pagetoid reticulosis for showing a histological pattern of
intense epidermotropism, in contrast with dermal infiltrate, which is not pronounced. 7 However, it is no longer accepted as an example of pagetoid reticulosis and
seemingly represents generalized forms of classic MF or cytotoxic, epidermotropic
CD8+ CTCL of severe evolution.8,22,34
Clinically, pagetoid reticulosis usually presents as an acral isolated erythematous
infiltrated lesion, plaque-type, with a remarkable hyperkeratotic or psoriatic
aspect. Histologically, it shows pronounced epidermal hyperplasia with intense
epidermotropism of small or medium-sized lymphocytes with cerebriform nuclei.
There are immunophenotypic differences between pagetoid reticulosis and classic MF
since the former may express CD4+ and CD8+ or be negative for
both, as well as express CD30+. 5,22,31,34 The cellular proliferation rate estimated by Ki-67 immunostaining is higher
than 30% in pagetoid reticulosis and lower than 10% in MF, but it still has a good
prognosis. 5,22,31,34
Granulomatous slack skin
Granulomatous slack skin shows a clinical pattern of erythematous or
dark-erythematous, atrophic, flaccid, pendular and redundant cutaneous lesions,
cutis-laxa-type (slack skin) in folding areas.
The granulomatous infiltrate may have a sarcoidic pattern, be of
annular-granuloma-type or have a multinucleated-giant-cell pattern. The granulomatous
infiltrate is sometimes so expressive that diagnosis of MF is not established and the
disease is interpreted as "granulomatous dermatosis". 5,35
In granulomatous cutis laxa, dense epidermotropism is added to the granulomatous
histological pattern, and cells engulfing lymphocytes and elastic fibers are
observed. This phenomenon is referred to as emperipolesis, in which elastic fibers
may be totally absent and mucin is detected in the lesion. 2,5,22,36

MYCOSIS FUNGOIDES: CLINICAL/HISTOLOGICAL VARIANTS DESCRIBED IN THE
LITERATURE
Hypopigmented mycosis fungoides
It is characterized by the presence of isolated hypochromic lesions or by the
coexistence of multiple erythematous and hypochromic lesions of small or large
diameters, sometimes alopecic. It can be expressed as a single MF manifestation or
coexist with plaque lesion or even tumors.
Hypopigmented MF is the clinical subtype most often observed in children and
adolescents and in patients with skin phototype IV-VI. However, it is also observed
in fair-skinned patients. 5,22,37 Lesions may be asymptomatic or discreetly pruriginous.
Indeterminate leprosy, pityriasis alba, atopic dermatitis, chronic eczema of
indefinite etiology, inflammatory vitiligo, extensive pityriasis versicolor and
post-inflammatory hypopigmentation are differential diagnoses. In confirmed cases,
histology is indistinguishable from classic MF. However, the immunophenotype can
reveal an increased frequency of CD8+ lymphocyte as observed on a report
of 15 patients with hypopigmented MF. 37 Ardigo et al. (2003) suggested that CD8+ immunomarking would
be more common in high-phototype patients with hypopigmented MF and in children, as
opposed to CD4+, which is more frequent in hypopigmented MF observed in
Caucasian adults. 38 Based on a review of 106 literature reports, Werner et al. (2005) indicated
the possibility of diagnostic error due to the clinical and histological similarity
of the disease to various others, particularly pityriasis alba. 39
The clinical course of the disease is the same as that of classic MF, with a good
therapeutic response to phototherapy and post-treatment repigmentation. 40
Erythrodermic mycosis fungoides
Patients with classic MF may develop erythrodermic conditions in the advanced stage
of the disease, but this is rare. These conditions are almost clinically
indistinguishable from those of SS; however, its distinct history and the
non-fulfillment of the syndrome's diagnostic criteria consolidate the difference. 22,24 Its histological and immunophenotypic aspects are identical to those of MF.
After treatment, the patient may relapse and exhibit conventional plaques and tumors
or relapse with the previous erythrodermic pattern. 22,24
Poikilodermatous mycosis fungoides (poikiloderma atrophicans
vasculare)
In this clinical subtype, lesions are characterized by erythematous brownish patches,
alternating hypo and hyperpigmentation with an atrophic pattern and with xerosis and
telangiectasias on the surface. In a series of 49 cases, this condition was more
common in young patients and more associated with lymphomatoid papulosis.
The main sites of involvement are breasts, trunk, gluteal region and flexures. The
disease may also be generalized. Histological findings are peculiar, as they show
atrophic epidermis losing interpapillary crests, lichenoid infiltrate and fibrosis of
the papillary dermis. Pautrier's microabscesses are usually absent. 5,22,41,42Dilated vessels and macrophages containing melanin are observed in the
superficial dermis. The immunohistochemical pattern is predominantly CD8+
and CD4-. When other manifestations of classic MF are inexistent,
diagnosis is certainly difficult and it is based on clinical evolution,
histopathological and immunophenotype correlation. 5,22,41,42
Purpuric mycosis fungoides
This is a rare form of MF in which patch lesions are persistent and pigmented.
Histologically, they also show extravasated red cells in the dermis, melanophages and
histiocytes. However, there is histological evidence of classic MF, such as band-like
infiltrate in the superficial dermis, epidermotropism of atypical lymphocytes and
lymphocyte alignment in the basal layer, which help with differential diagnosis from
lichen aureus, nummular eczema or pharmacodermias that show purpuric conditions. 43
Most cells are CD4+, but there may be expression of CD8+ cells.
Monoclonal molecular rearrangement of T cell receptor (TCR) has been shown in the
infiltrate of purpuric MF, but also in cases of purpuric pharmacodermias referred to
as "atypical pigmented purpuric". Therefore, it is not always easy to
clearly define the diagnosis of purpuric MF. 31,43,44
Syringotropic mycosis fungoides
This is a rare form of MF in which accentuated infiltration of eccrine sweat glands
and ducts by lymphomatous cells occur. 5,45 Clinically, lesions tend to be single, isolated in erythematous brownish
plaques and slightly desquamative, or in groups of erythematous papules.5,45
Alopecia is frequently associated with the lesion. Apparently, there is no
preferential location, and the infiltrate is dense around and in the gland. The
follicles and the epidermis may be infiltrated. Epidermotropism is not common, and
visualization of Pautrier's microabscesses is rare.45,46 Detection of monoclonal CD4+ lymphocytes and TCR gene rearrangement
indicates that these conditions belong to the MF spectrum, although the term
"syringotropic T-cell cutaneous lymphoma" is used for such conditions. 5,22,31,45,46
Vesiculobullous mycosis fungoides
Vesicular, bullous and dyshidrosiform lesions associated with MF are extremely rare. 5 They present as isolated or multiple, flaccid or tense lesions. They appear on
normal skin or on an erythematous base or in association with plaques and tumors.
Patients are generally older than those diagnosed with classic MF, and the reported
cases involve Caucasian individuals.47,48 The trunk and limbs are the preferential locations.
Histologically, there is epidermotropism of cerebriform lymphocytes and even
Pautrier's microabscesses.47,48 A blister or a vesicle may form in subcorneal, intraepidermal and subepidermal
locations; therefore, bullous eruptions could be flaccid or tense. 5 It is suggested that the bullous originates from the confluence of Pautrier's
microabscesses and the accumu-lation of lymphocytes in the basal layer, thus missing
the dermal-epidermal cohesion. 5,49-51
The presence of blisters or vesicles accompanying MF may indicate a bad prognosis as
approximately 50% of the patients have one year of life after these lesions appear. 5,22,47,48 A dyshidrosiform variant with lesions located on the palms and plants has also
been described. 49
Other subtypes
In addition to the clinical subtypes described above, MF may manifest as or be
accompanied by uncommon and atypical morphological expressions, such as papular,
anetodermic, hyperkeratotic, vegetative, pustular, ichthyosiform or even
"invisible" MF. 49-55 The latter is related to skin with a
normal appearance which shows, on histopathology, immunophenotype and electron
microscopy, evidence of infiltration by monoclonal and atypical lymphocytes. In
general, these patients show classic or suggestive lesions of MF that are referred to
as "invisible" MF lesions due to their normal appearance on clinical
examination, and sometimes as "invisible" MF for corresponding to the
hypochromiant MF present in patients with very fair skin and, therefore,
"identical" to normal skin.54,55
Mycosis fungoides in childhood and adolescence
It is estimated that only 5% of all MF cases occur in childhood and adolescence;
however, MF is the most common cause of cutaneous lymphoma at this age range. 56 The incidence of MF in individuals younger than 20 years is low, but it
appears to be increasing, particularly the hypochromiant subtype, in patients with a
high skin phototype. In addition to hypochromiant MF, another subtype reported in
childhood and adolescence is Woringer-Kolopp pagetoid reticulosis. Cases that are
clinically similar to lichenoid and acute varicelliform pityriasis also occur in
childhood, and they are particularly difficult to be diagnosed as MF. 57,58
The progressive course of MF in childhood and adolescence is controversial. Some
authors suggest that progression is faster and more aggressive with frequent
extracutaneous involvement; however, others report that progression follows the MF
standard observed among adults. 5,22
Staging and classification
Olsen et al. (2007) published the staging norms of MF and SS as a result of the ISCL
- EORTC discussions taking into account the advancement of cellular and molecular
biology and the advancement in diagnostic methods shown in charts 1 and 2. 6
Histopathology of mycosis fungoides
Histopathology of MF depends on the stage in which a biopsy is performed. In the
classic early patchstage MF, microscopic findings are often unspecific and they
overlap with those of other inflammatory or non-neoplastic diseases. Empirical
clinical treatment with the use of topical corticosteroids can alter the histological
aspect, making it even more unspecific; therefore, treatment should be discontinued
for approximately 2 to 4 weeks before performing a biopsy. The same applies for the
use of the PUVA method. 15
In the patch stage with well-established lesions, lymphocyte infiltrate on the edges
of the basal layer and epidermotropism of isolated cells are histologically observed.
Most of these cells are small and differentiated lymphocytes with slightly rounded or
cerebriform nuclei. The epidermis may show acanthosis, hyperkeratosis or signs of
damage in the basal layer (pigmentary incontinence) and edema. There may be
prominence of postcapillary venules and infiltrate containing eosinophils,
plamocytes, macrophages and dermal dendritic cells. Papillary dermal fibrosis may
also be present. Density of the infiltrate is variable and it increases as the lesion
develops and clinically resembles plaque lesions. 15,31,59-62
In well-constituted plaques, the microscopic finding is an epidermis with a certain
degree of acanthosis, psoriasiform pattern and rare or absent spongiosis. There is a
dense subepidermal and band-like lymphocyte infiltrate with cerebriform nuclei (Figure 5). Epidermotropism is most prominent
(Figure 6). Pautrier's abscesses are found
in one-third of the cases, and lymphocyte alignment in the basal layer as well as
dermal infiltrate with atypical cells with irregular and ceribriform nuclei are
frequently found (Figures 7 and 8). 15,31,59
FIGURE 5
Mycosis fungoides: psoriasiform pattern with hyperplasia of the epidermis,
band-like inflammatory infiltration and epidermotropism of lymphocytes. HE,
(100X)
FIGURE 6
Mycosis fungoides: intense epidermotropism of lymphocytes on the epidermis and
mild spongiosis. HE, (400X)
FIGURE 7
Mycosis fungoides: epidermotropism of lymphocytes and Pautrier's micro-abscess.
(HE X 400)
FIGURE 8
Mycosis fungoides: epidermotropism and lymphocyte alignment in the basal layer
are shown. HE, (400X)
The tumor stage is characterized by diffuse and dense dermal infiltrate of
medium-sized and large cerebriform lymphocytes and epidermotropism loss. There is a
concomitant decrease in the number of Treactive lymphocytes and dendritic cells. In
this phase, transformation into large T cell lymphoma CD30+ or
CD30-may occur.15,31,59-62
The histopathological aspects of Sezary syndrome are indistinguishable from
those of MF. Epidermotropism is less intense, but Pautrier's microabscesses may be
present. The lymphocytic infiltrate is small to medium-sized and the cerebriform
nuclei aspect is similar to that observed in MF. Presence of granulomatous reaction,
mucin deposit on pilous follicles and transformation into large cell lymphoma in
advanced stages are histopathological variants These aspects may also be present in
MF. Lymphonodal compromising shows the same infiltrate pattern as that of MF. 5,22
Immunohistochemical and molecular aspects
MF tumor cells are characterized by epidermotropic peripheral T lymphocytes whose
phenotype is CD2+, CD3+, CD4+, CD5+,
CD8-, CD45RO+, CD20- and CD30-. (Figures 9, 10). CD4- or CD8+, double positive or double
negative cases are rarely seen. 15,63,64
FIGURE 9
Mycosis fungoides: phenotypic studies showing CD3-positive T-cell on the
epidermis and dermis. (CD3 immunostain 400X)
FIGURE 10
Mycosis fungoides: phenotypic studies showing CD4-positive T-cell on the
epidermis and dermis. (CD4 immunostain 400X)
The loss of CD7 expression can be observed even in the early phases of the disease.
However, isolated negativity for CD7 is not a sufficient criterion for diagnosis, as
it can be shown in inflammatory dermatoses. With rare exceptions, both Ki-67 and CD
30 tend to negativity in early MF phases. 63
The specific antigen for the cutaneous tropism of lymphocytes (cutaneous
leucocyte-associated antigen receptor - CLA), recognized by antibody HECA-452, is
expressed in the form of lymphomas and T-cell dyscrasias in most MF cases. 63 Markers such as T-cell intracellular antigen (TIA-1), granzyme B and perforin
are negative in MF. 5,22
Complete evaluation of T-antigen expression or immunomarking loss, of CD2 and CD5,
for instance, can provide information that corroborates diagnosis, but even so,
sensitivity remains low. 15,63 On the other hand, the study on clonality, associated with
immunohistochemistry, provides high diagnostic specificity, particularly when there
is isolated loss of CD7 expression. 15,63 It has been recently suggested that regulatory T cells correlate with stage of
disease and prognosis in mycosis fungoides, particularly FOXP3+ Tregs,
which could be expressed in the epidermotropic infiltrate in different stages of MF.65
The diagnostic method most often used in molecular biology for detecting monoclonal
T-lymphocytes is TCR gene rearrangement analysis, which can be performed by
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) methods or Southern blot. However, some studies have
shown that only 53% of early-stage MF cases showed a population of monoclonal
T-lymphocytes. An additional inconvenience is that various skin diseases may also
have monoclonal T-cell expansion. 21,66-68
The observations above have led specialists to discuss the diagnostic difficulties of
early MF lesions, and histopathology, immunohistochemistry and molecular biology
techniques have been proposed to improve diagnostic accuracy and establish early diagnosis.16,18,21,23,31,64-70
The immunohistochemical pattern of Sezary syndrome is CD3+,
CD4+, CD7- and CD8- cells, which does not
distinguish it from MF. Immunostaining for MUM-1 (multiple myeloma oncogene) might be
positive in the syndrome and negative in MF. This could help with differential
diagnosis. 71

CONCLUSION
Primary cutaneous lymphomas are rare, not always clearly classifiable, but of essential
knowledge to dermatologists. Mycosis fungoides is the most frequent primary cutaneous
lymphoma, and various differential diagnoses can be made in the early phases of the
disease. It is typically a disease with difficult clinical, histopathological and
immunohistochemical findings. The authors presented classic manifestations of MF and its
clinical and histopathological variants. Sezary syndrome is very rare, but must
be considered a routine differential diagnosis when investigating erythrodermias whose
etiology must be clarified. And, as a sign of its identity in the mycosis-fungoides
"spectrum", Sezary syndrome exhibits histological and
immunohistochemical aspects that are indistinguishable from those observed in MF.
