[Abstract, Introduction, Methods, Results, Mixed, Mixed, Mixed, Discussion, Mixed, Mixed, Mixed, Discussion]

Magnetic Resonance Imaging Evaluation of Cardiac Masses. Background Cardiac tumors are extremely rare; however, when there is clinical suspicion, proper diagnostic evaluation is necessary to plan the most appropriate treatment. In this context, cardiovascular magnetic resonance imaging (CMRI) plays an important role, allowing a comprehensive characterization of such lesions.   Objective To review cases referred to a CMRI Department for investigation of cardiac and paracardiac masses. To describe the positive case series with a brief review of the literature for each type of lesion and the role of cardiovascular magnetic resonance imaging in evaluation.   Methods Between August 2008 and December 2011, all cases referred for CMRI with suspicion of tumor involving the heart were reviewed. Cases with positive histopathological diagnosis, clinical evolution or therapeutic response compatible with the clinical suspicion and imaging findings were selected.   Results Among the 13 cases included in our study, eight (62%) had histopathological confirmation. We describe five benign tumors (myxomas, rhabdomyoma and fibromas), five malignancies (sarcoma, lymphoma, Richter syndrome involving the heart and metastatic disease) and three non-neoplastic lesions (pericardial cyst, intracardiac thrombus and infectious vegetation).   Conclusion CMRI plays an important role in the evaluation of cardiac masses of non-neoplastic and neoplastic origin, contributing to a more accurate diagnosis in a noninvasive manner and assisting in treatment planning, allowing safe clinical follow-up with good reproducibility.

Introduction
Cardiac and paracardiac masses may be neoplastic or non-neoplastic. Primary cardiac
neoplasms are rare, with an estimated prevalence of 0.001 to 0.03% in studies performed
during necropsy1. Among the primary
tumors 75% are benign, with myxomas being the most frequent lesions corresponding to
more than half of the cases. The most prevalent primary malignant tumors are the cardiac
sarcomas. Metastatic disease to the heart is 20 to 40 times more common than primary
neoplasia, and 15% of patients with any type of cancer may present with cardiac
metastases2,3. Among the differential diagnoses for neoplasia,
intracardiac thrombus4 is highlighted.
However, a wide variety of lesions may represent a differentiated diagnosis for cardiac
tumors, such as infectious processes, anatomic variations, focal myocardial
hypertrophies and pericardiac cysts5.
The imaging method most frequently used to assess a suspicious cardiac lesion is the
transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE)6,7 . However, in the last few years,
cardiovascular magnetic resonance imaging (CMRI) has been established as an important
tool in the identification and characterization of cardiac and paracardiac
masses8. CMRI is a noninvasive
exam, does not use ionizing radiation, has a wide field of view and has a high contrast
resolution. The paramagnetic contrast agent (gadolinium) is safer and more effective
when compared to iodinated contrast used in computed tomography (CT scan). CMRI also
allows the evaluation of cardiac morphology and function in a single exam9.
In this work, we reviewed the cases referred to our MRI service for investigation of
cardiac and paracardiac masses. Cases with diagnostic confirmation were selected for
presentation; the series is described along with a brief review of the literature for
each type of tumor and the role of CMR in evaluation.

Methods
Between August 2008 and December 2011, 593 CMRI exams were performed in our service. All
examinations and clinical data of the patients referred for investigation of cardiac
masses were retrospectively reviewed. We selected cases of cardiac masses of neoplastic,
benign or malignant nature, of primary or metastatic origin, as well as non-neoplastic
lesions provided that they met the following criteria: 1) clinically appropriate exams
and good quality images; 2) lesions confirmed by histopathology, or 3) lesions with
therapeutic response and/or clinical evolution consistent with the clinical suspicion
and imaging findings. All patients or legal guardians received the necessary information
regarding the procedure to be performed, as well as the possible use of images in
scientific papers, and signed an Informed Consent Form (ICF) prior to the exam.
The tests were performed using 1.5 Tesla MRI Equipment (Achieva, Philips Medical
Systems, the Netherlands), using surface coils with phase arrangement and heart and
respiratory synchronization (electrocardiogram - ECG vector). Gadolinium chelate (Gd)
was used as the intravenous contrast agent and was administered by infusion pump in a
dose appropriate for the patient's weight (0.1 to 0.2 mmol/kg). In all cases, a
dedicated protocol was used for the assessment of cardiac masses, including
morphological, functional and tissue characterization. This protocol was integrated into
static sequences T1 and T2 weighted dark blood turbo spin-echo (TSE),
with and without fat suppression, using dynamic sequences (cineMR) gradient
echo balanced with bright blood (Balanced Steady State
FreePrecession- bSSFP), sequences of post contrast dynamic cardiac perfusion
and images of late gadolinium enhancement (LGE). Images were obtained in conventional
and complementary cardiac planes when necessary, and a physician experienced in cardiac
imaging guided the performance of all exams (Table
1).

Results
Thirteen cases (2.2% of all tests performed in the period) were included in this study,
which corresponded to a total of nine men with a mean age of 45 years. Table 2 summarizes the main clinical data for all
patients. Eight (62%) patients had histopathological confirmation of the lesion,
described as: one undifferentiated sarcoma, one rhabdomyoma, one cardiac fibroma, two
atrial myxomas and three cases of secondary neoplastic involvement, one being a cardiac
metastasis (parathyroid carcinoma), one involving direct intravascular extension (renal
cell carcinoma of the right kidney) and one myocardial involvement caused by B cell
lymphoma. Histopathological study was lacking for five (38%) patients: one fibroma, one
pericardial cyst, one case of Richter's cardiac syndrome, one intra-atrial thrombus in a
patient with cardiac amyloidosis and one case of infectious vegetation. These patients
were included in the study because their lesions showed therapeutic response and/or
clinical evolution consistent with clinical suspicion and imaging findings. Regarding
etiology, six (46%) lesions were primary cardiac neoplasias, of which five (83%) were
benign and only one was malignant. Among the five cases of malignant neoplasias
involving the heart, four (80%) were not primary neoplasias. In three (23%) cases,
examination by CMRI diagnosed non-neoplastic lesions.

Benign tumors
We found two cardiac myxomas in two different patients (Figure 1), one case showing an oval mass in the right atrium attached to the
atrial septum (Figures 1A to 1D) and another showing a smaller and more irregular lesion, this
one attached to the anterior leaflet of the mitral valve (Figures 1E to 1H). Both lesions showed
heterogeneous signal and areas of high intensity best evidenced in LGE sequences; in the
larger lesion, it was possible to notice a component of hematic thrombus attached to the
surface of the lesion. Two patients were described having a cardiac fibroma (Figures 2A to 2F).In both cases, a well-defined oval mass on the wall of the left ventricle
(LV) with a signal similar to the myocardium was identified, but with homogeneous
intense signal on LGE sequences. In the case of cardiac rhabdomyoma (Figures 2G to 2I) we also found a well-defined mass on the LV wall, but with a prominent
hyperintense signal on T2-weighted sequence and with no significant post-contrast
enhancement.
Figure 1
Cardiac myxomas in two different patients. First patient: image in four-chambers
view, T2-weighted sequence with fat suppression (A), short-axis T1-weighted (B),
four chambers bright blood SSFP (C) and LGE (D). The arrows show the hematic
thrombus attached to the tumor. Second patient: images in four-chambers view,
T1-weighted (E), SSFP (F) and LGE (G and H). The arrows show the component of the
lesion that protrudes through the mitral valve.
Figure 2
Fibromas and cardiac rhabdomyoma. Cardiac fibromas in two different patients.
First patient: horizontal long axis T1-weighted image (A), post-contrast dynamic
perfusion sequence (B) and LGE four-chambers view (C). Second patient: SSFP image
in four-chambers view (D), perfusion sequence in short axis (E) and LGE in long
axis (F). Cardiac rhabdomyoma: images in four-chambers view, T2-weighted sequence
with fat suppression (G); perfusion sequence (H) and LGE (I).

Malignant tumors
In a patient with primary cardiac undifferentiated sarcoma (Figure 3), a partially bound infiltrative lesion is observed
involving mainly the interventricular septum, with a slight hyperintense signal on
T2-weighted sequence and heterogeneous post-contrast enhancement obliterating the
ventricular cavities. CMRI showed functional impairment caused by the tumor, with
reduced ventricular ejection fractions. Two patients are also described: one with
cardiac involvement caused by diffuse lymphoma of large B cells (Figure 4) and one with Richter's syndrome (Figure 5). In both, infiltrative lesions with heterogeneous signal
and enhancement in the myocardium are seen; the former involves mainly the anterolateral
wall of the LV and the latter involves the atrial septum with extension to the
pericardium. In the case of Richter's syndrome, it was also possible to identify the
coronary arteries involved by the mass, with preserved shape and size, an aspect
commonly described in mediastinal lymphomas. In addition, another two cases of secondary
neoplastic involvement are described in the heart (Figure
6). In the patient with metastasis of parathyroid carcinoma, a heterogeneous
irregular lesion is seen involving the posterior wall of the left atrium and the
pulmonary veins. In the patient with invasion of renal cell carcinoma, a right renal
mass is identified invading the lower vena cava, with tumor thrombus extending into the
right atrium, passing through the tricuspid and pulmonary valves and reaching the right
pulmonary artery, where it is associated with another thrombotic lesion.
Figure 3
Undifferentiated cardiac sarcoma. Axial T2-weighted sequence (A), SSFP sequences
in four-chambers (B) and short axis (C), sequence of LGE in the short axis
(D).
Figure 4
Secondary cardiac involvement by diffuse lymphoma of large B cells. Images in the
short axis bright blood SSFP (A), T2-weighted sequence with fat suppression (B)
and LGE sequence (C).
Figure 5
Richter's syndrome with cardiac involvement. Axial T1-weighted sequence (A),
posterior short axis and four-chambers view SSFP (B and C), perfusion sequence
four-chambers view (D) and LGE sequence (E). The arrows show the coronary arteries
in the middle of the lesion. The follow-up exam post-treatment was performed with
computed tomography (F) because of the other thoracic lesions and showed reduction
of the lesion (partial response).
Figure 6
Secondary neoplastic involvement of the heart. Patient with metastatic parathyroid
carcinoma; axial T2-weighted sequence (A), horizontal long axis SSFP and perfusion
(B and C), axial tridimensional T1-weighted post-contrast sequence (D). The arrows
show the involvement of the pulmonary veins. Patient with invasion of renal cell
carcinoma of the right kidney; axial 3D T1-weighted post-contrast sequence (E),
short axis SSFP (F), on the plane of bifurcation of the pulmonary artery SSFP (G)
and perfusion sequence (H). The arrows show the thrombotic tumor component
reaching the right atrium and the right pulmonary artery.

Pseudotumoral lesions
In a patient with cardiac amyloidosis (Figures 7A
to 7C), we identified a thrombus inside the left
atrium attached to the wall, with low signal amid the bright blood and no areas of
post-contrast enhancement. In this case, it was also possible to observe myocardial
thickening with diffuse late enhancement, which is common in cardiac amyloidosis. One
patient had infectious vegetation inside the LV (Figures
7D to 7F), characterized in CMRI as an
intracavitary low-signal irregular lesion attached to the septal wall of the LV, with no
areas of enhancement following injection of Gd. In the case of the pericardial cyst
(Figures 7G to 7I), we observe the characteristic appearance of the lesion, which is
lobulated with thin and incomplete septa, with homogeneous hyperintense signal on
T2-weighted and without post-contrast enhancement, located adjacent to the right atrium
and in contact with the pericardium sac.
Figure 7
Non-neoplastic lesions. Patient with cardiac amyloidosis (arrowheads) and thrombus
in the left atrium (arrows); SSFP images on the plane of the outflow tract of the
left ventricle (A) and vertical long axis (B), sequence of LGE, four-chambers view
(C). Patient with infectious vegetation inside the left ventricle (arrows);
fourchambers view SSFP images (D), long-axis T1-weighted (E) and LGE four-chambers
view (F). Pericardial cyst, axial T2-weighted image (G), SSFP long axis of the RV
(H), axial three-dimensional T1-weighted post-contrast (I).

Discussion
We describe here a series of 13 cases of cardiac and paracardiac masses studied by CMRI.
The findings of this study are similar to those described in the medical literature
regarding the incidence and characteristics of the lesions. Among the primary lesions,
most were found to be benign lesions, with only one case of primary malignant neoplasia
of the heart (a sarcoma, the most common type). In three cases, the CMRI identified
non-neoplastic lesions, thereby helping to give the patients the appropriate
treatment.

Benign tumors
Two lesions were diagnosed as myxomas through CMRI examination, with histopathologic
confirmation after surgical resection. Among the benign tumors, the cardiac myxoma
represents the most common primary lesion affecting the heart. It is an endocardial mass
which is generally mobile and connected to the interatrial septum by a narrow base, most
commonly near the fossa ovalis; 75% of myxomas are located in the left
atrium, 20% are found in the right atrium and a small percentage are found in the
ventricles10. On CMRI, myxomas
are well-defined, espheric or ovoid lobuled masses with heterogeneous signal intensity,
usually isointense in relation to the adjacent myocardium on T1-weighted sequences, and
hyperintense on T2-weighted sequences, depending on the content of the lesion. In
addition to the myxoid material, the lesion may contain thrombus, necrotic or cystic
material, calcified material or areas of acute or subacute hemorrhage11. After injection of Gd, heterogeneous
enhancement helps to differentiate this lesion from cardiac thrombus, especially LGE
sequences. Sequences of cineMR allow the demonstration of the precise location and
mobility of the tumor, which may prolapse through the atrioventricular valves, most
commonly the mitral valve12.
Among the three patients under 20 years of age included in this study, one rhabdomyoma
and two fibromas were diagnosed, which is in agreement with the two most common benign
neoplasms in children and adolescents.
Rhabdomyoma is the most common primary cardiac tumor in children, accounting for over
60% of all primary cardiac neoplasms in this age group. The neoplasia originates in the
myocardium and primarily affects the ventricles; it can be single or multiple and may be
located in the intramyocardial or intracavitary areas, connected to the cardiac
muscle13. On CMRI, the lesion
has a solid and homogeneous appearance, isointense to the myocardium on T1-weighted
sequences and hyperintense on T2-weighted sequences. LGE sequences do not show an
important enhancement of this lesion.
Cardiac fibromas represent the second most common neoplasia in children and young adult
patients. They are also found in the myocardium and typically present as a single
well-defined lesion of intramyocardial location, most commonly in the interventricular
septum13. On CMRI, the lesion is
characterized as being isointense or discreetly hyperintense in relation to the
myocardium on T1-weighted sequences, and hypointense on T2-weighted14. On LGE sequences, the fibromas present
with intense and homogeneous enhancement, explained by the overflow and retention of the
contrast material in the broad extracellular space which surrounds the fibrous tissue of
the tumor15. Sometimes the lesion
presents a central component of low signal intensity, which may be associated with
calcifications16. The
characteristics of T2-signal (hypointense) and LGE (prominently hyperintense) are the
most specific in differentiating this lesion from cardiac rhabdomyoma14,15.
Other benign neoplasias found in the heart are lipomas, papillary fibroelastomas and
hemangiomas. Although not described in this study, knowledge of the main characteristics
found on CMRI is important in differentiating among various cardiac lesions.
Lipomas are encapsulated lesions, usually located in the subendocardium, characterized
on CMRI as hyperintense on T1-weighted and T2-weighted sequences, with an evident signal
decrease in sequences with fat suppression. The papillary fibroelastomas are located
preferentially on the mitral and aortic surfaces and may be pedunculated. On CMRI, they
may present as lesions with high mobility on cineMR sequences, with intermediate signal
intensity on T1-weighted sequences and hyperintense signal on T2-weighted sequences. The
hemangiomas are usually located in the ventricles, present with an intermediary signal
intensity on T1-weighted sequences, and are hyperintense on T2-weighted sequences. LGE
images show hyperintense enhancement that may be heterogeneous due to the presence of
calcifications and a fibrous septum inside the tumor14.
The CMRI is not only highly accurate for the characterization of benign tumors, but is
also able to provide important information regarding functional impairment and cardiac
anatomical details in terms of surgical planning for the treatment of these
lesions9.

Malignant tumors
The only primary cardiac malignancy found in this study was an undifferentiated sarcoma.
Sarcomas are neoplasias of mesenchymal origin that exhibit aggressive characteristics,
usually with a fatal outcome. All types of sarcoma can be found in the heart,
angiosarcoma is the most common in adults (37%), usually located in the right atrium.
There are also undifferentiated sarcomas (24%), leiomyosarcomas (8%), fibrosarcomas (5%)
and osteosarcomas (3-9%), these are most commonly found in the left atrium17. On CMRI exam, they are generally large
and heterogeneous with ill-defined margins, frequently occupying almost the entire
affected chamber or multiple chambers of the heart. Pericardial or extracardiac
structures invasion or valvular destruction may be identified. The pericardial
involvement can be seen through the presence of effusion, thickening or nodules in the
membrane. The signal intensity in these types of tumors is heterogeneous, generally
intermediate on T1 weighted sequences and hyperintense on T2-weighted sequences;
enhancement after administration of Gd is also heterogeneous11. Cardiac lymphoma is another primary malignancy of the
heart, but these are extremely rare and affect mainly immunosuppressed individuals. They
are mostly non-Hodgkin B-cell type and preferentially involve the right atrium, with
invasion of adjacent structures and voluminous pericardial effusion11.
In the remaining four cases of malignancies involving the heart, there were different
neoplasms resulting in secondary cardiac involvement. These findings are consistent with
the data described in the literature2.
Richter's syndrome is a rare complication of chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) of B
cells, occurring in 2 to 8% of cases, which consists in the formation of a rapidly
growing mass, constituting a high grade non-Hodgkin lymphoma. This syndrome has a very
poor prognosis and the clinical signs and symptoms are not specific, making diagnosis
difficult, especially in the early stages of transformation. New tests have been studied
to more easily detect Richter's syndrome in patients with CLL, including imaging
studies18.
The cardiac metastases have pericardial effusion as the most common manifestation of
cardiac involvement. Lung neoplasms most commonly metastasize to the heart. Other
primary tumors that can metastasize to the heart are: breast, kidney and esophageal
carcinomas, melanomas, lymphomas and leukemias2,3. Heart involvement may
occur in several ways, such as through direct invasion, lymphatic involvement,
hematogenic dissemination or tumor transvenous extension. Lung neoplasms usually invade
the heart directly. Lymphomas, leukemias and melanomas usually involve the heart by
hematogenous dissemination, while renal cell carcinoma involves more frequently in the
right atrium, through the dissemination of a tumor thrombus via the inferior vena cava.
Metastases do not have a specific appearance on CMRI, but most of them show hypointense
signal on T1-weighted sequences and hyperintense signal on T2-weighted sequences. The
exception is melanoma, which may present hyperintense signal on T1-weighted sequence
because of the paramagnetic properties of melanin. Almost all types of metastatic
lesions present post-contrast enhancement14.
Despite the lower specificity of CMRI in the differentiation of types of malignancy
involving the heart, the exam can provide important information for the local staging of
the lesion (precise location, dimensions in different axes, the presence of invasion of
adjacent structures and cardiac functional impairment), in addition to the follow-up
over the course of treatment in a non-invasive way and without using ionizing radiation
or iodinated contrast media15.

Pseudotumoral lesions
Finally, three non-neoplastic lesions were diagnosed by CMRI exam: one intracardiac
thrombus, one pericardial cyst and one infective vegetative lesion.
Thrombi are the lesions that are most frequently confused with cardiac neoplasms.
Typically, these are located in the left atrium and are related to the presence of
atrial fibrillation; when diagnosed in the LV, they occur in patients as sequelae of
myocardial infarction, Chagas cardiomyopathy with LV apical aneurysm or severe
ventricular dysfunction of any etiology. In CMRI, the signal intensity of thrombi vary
according to their "age" and the phase of hemoglobin degradation. Acute thrombi present
hyperintense signal on T1 and T2-weighted sequences, while subacute thrombi are
hyperintense on T1-weighted sequences but have low signal intensity on T2 weighted
sequences. Organized chronic thrombi present low-signal intensity on T1 and T2-weighted
sequences due to the presence of hemosiderin deposits19,20. Perfusion
images and LGE are most important in differentiating tumors from thrombi, since
neoplastic lesions present with a vascularized tissue component that enhances after
contrast, while there is no enhancement in hematic thrombi. Very rarely, old organized
thrombi can enhance due to the presence of fibrotic tissue, but the other morphological
and signal characteristics identified on CMRI help to differentiate them from
tumors9.
Pericardial cysts are congenital malformations, which are rare, usually localized in the
right costophrenic angle (70% of cases). They are usually diagnosed as an incidental
finding on chest radiographs or echocardiograms. The CMRI examination shows a
paracardiac, homogeneous, well-defined structure with low or intermediate signal
intensity on T1-weighted sequences and hyperintense signal on T2-weighted sequences. The
T1 signal of the cyst depends on its content; when "dense" or highly proteic it may
present with a high signal on T1-weighted sequence. The pericardial cyst does not
enhance after administration of Gd and CMRI is the best exam to characterize the cystic
nature of the lesion, in addition to providing detailed information as to its location,
size and relation with the heart and other adjacent structures21.
The most frequently used tests to confirm the diagnosis of infective endocarditis are
the TTE and TEE (transesophageal echocardiogram). CMRI may be useful in patients with
limited-quality images on echocardiogram, and also in patients in whom it is not
possible to perform a transesophageal exam. CMRI complement the evaluation of infectious
vegetations by permitting the identification of perivalvular extension of the lesions,
as well as locating abscesses and characterizing lesions in locations where a suitable
evaluation was not possible by ecocardiogram22.

Conclusion
Cardiac tumors are rare; however, the differentiation of non-neoplastic lesions from
neoplastic ones and a correct identification of the type of lesion is essential for
appropriate therapeutic planning. In this aspect, CMRI is of great importance since it
is a noninvasive exam and offers a wide field of view and superior tissue
characterization, without the using iodinated contrast media or ionizing radiation.
Besides the important diagnostic role and its usefulness in the choice of treatment,
often eliminating the need for biopsy, CMRI may be indicated for patients follow-up with
cardiac neoplasms, representing a safe and high reproducible method.
