[Abstract, Results, Discussion, Methods]

Stearoyl-CoA desaturase-1 is a key factor for lung cancer-initiating cells. In recent years, studies of cancer development and recurrence have been influenced by the cancer stem cells (CSCs)/cancer-initiating cells (CICs) hypothesis. According to this, cancer is sustained by highly positioned, chemoresistant cells with extensive capacity of self renewal, which are responsible for disease relapse after chemotherapy. Growth of cancer cells as three-dimensional non-adherent spheroids is regarded as a useful methodology to enrich for cells endowed with CSC-like features. We have recently reported that cell cultures derived from malignant pleural effusions (MPEs) of patients affected by adenocarcinoma of the lung are able to efficiently form spheroids in non-adherent conditions supplemented with growth factors. By expression profiling, we were able to identify a set of genes whose expression is significantly upregulated in lung tumor spheroids versus adherent cultures. One of the most strongly upregulated gene was stearoyl-CoA desaturase (SCD1), the main enzyme responsible for the conversion of saturated into monounsaturated fatty acids. In the present study, we show both by RNA interference and through the use of a small molecule inhibitor that SCD1 is required for lung cancer spheroids propagation both in stable cell lines and in MPE-derived primary tumor cultures. Morphological examination and image analysis of the tumor spheroids formed in the presence of SCD1 inhibitors showed a different pattern of growth characterized by irregular cell aggregates. Electron microscopy revealed that the treated spheroids displayed several features of cellular damage and immunofluorescence analysis on optical serial sections showed apoptotic cells positive for the M30 marker, most of them positive also for the stemness marker ALDH1A1, thus suggesting that the SCD1 inhibitor is selectively killing cells with stem-like properties. Furthermore, SCD1-inhibited lung cancer cells were strongly impaired in their in vivo tumorigenicity and ALDH1A1 expression. These results suggest that SCD1 is a critical target in lung cancer tumor-initiating cells.

Results
SCD1 upregulation in lung cancer spheroids goes in parallel with increased ALDH1A1 activity
Lung cancer spheroids obtained from MPE-derived cell cultures (MPEDCC) could be serially propagated in vitro and gave rise efficiently to tumor masses reproducing the same histopathological features of the original human tumors when implanted in immunodeficient mice.30, 31 Gene expression analysis led to the identification of a set of 19 genes overexpressed in tumor spheroids versus adherent cultures. Among the overexpressed genes, SCD1 was one of the most significantly upregulated in spheroids.30
We first determined the spheroid-forming efficiency in a panel of five MPE-derived cell cultures named Pe d/10, Pe e/10, Pe o/11, Pe p/11 and Pe s/11 obtained from distinct non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients (for their origin and nomenclature see the Materials and Methods section and Mancini et al.30) and in a stable NSCLC cell line (NCI-H460) trying to establish a correlation with ALDH1A1 activity. The results, shown in Figures 1a and b, demonstrate that cells with higher ALDH1A1 activity show the highest efficiency in tumor spheroid formation. This is clearly evident when comparing the behavior of NCI-H460, Pe o/11, Pe d/10 and Pe e/10, which have ALDH1A1 positive cells ranging from 25.1% to 11.5% and a strong spheroid-forming ability, with that of Pe s/11 and Pe p/11, where a value for ALDH1A1 activity below 5%, was accompanied by a reduced ability to form spheroids (Figures 1a and b).
Next, to confirm and expand our previous microarray data, we verified by western blotting and real-time RT-PCR, SCD1 expression in three of these selected primary cultures and in the stable cell line NCI-H460. As shown in Figures 1c and d, all four lung cancer cultures analyzed presented a more than 10-fold increase of SCD1 mRNA levels in spheroids compared with adherent cells (Student's t-test: P<0.01 for NCI-H460, Pe e/10 and Pe o/11; P<0.05 for Pe d/10), which was paralleled by a constant increase in SCD1 protein levels.
SCD1 is required for spheroid formation
On the basis of the previous data, we next assessed the contribution of SCD1 to the formation of spheroids. Cell cultures were transfected with a siRNA against SCD1 or a control siRNA (scramble) and a spheroid-forming assay was performed. The results showed a dramatic reduction of the number of spheroids formed in SCD1-depleted cultures: siSCD1-transfected cell cultures show a 2- to 3-fold decrease of spheroid-forming efficiency, compared with the cultures transfected with a control siRNA (Student's t-test: P<0.01 for NCI-H460 and Pe o/11; P<0.05 for Pe d/10) (Figures 2a and b).
MF-438, a thiadiazole-pyridazine derivate, was recently described as a potent, orally available SCD1 enzymatic inhibitor that exhibits good pharmacokinetics and metabolic stability.17, 18 First, we tested in adherent cultures from MPEDCC and in the NCI-H460 cell line the effect of MF-438 on cell viability in a 72-h growth inhibition assay. All cell cultures analyzed were highly resistant to this inhibitor, showing IC50 values between 20 and 50 mM (Supplementary Figure 1). To examine the effect of SCD1 inhibition on spheroid formation, the same inhibitor was tested in a spheroid-forming assay. Surprisingly, as shown in Figure 2c and Table 1, Pe o/11 as well as NCI-H460 spheroids were very sensitive to MF-438 with IC50 values below 1 mM, showing a more than 100-fold sensitization compared with adherent cultures. To confirm the specificity of the inhibition, we performed rescue experiments using oleate, the main product of SCD1 activity, in spheroids treated or not with MF-438. As shown in Figure 2d, oleate supplementation in the form of conjugate with BSA (OA-BSA) partially but significantly reversed spheroids inhibition by MF-438, indicating that fatty acid desaturation by SCD1 is essential for spheroids formation (Student's t-test: P<0.05). Same results were also obtained using a different enzymatic inhibitor of SCD1 A93957210 (Supplementary Figure 2).
We also analyzed the three-dimensional morphology of tumor spheroids grown in sphere medium with or without the MF-438 inhibitor, using a dose (1 mM), which did not affect cell morphology in 2D adherent cultures (data not shown) and below their IC50 values (Table 1). Although untreated cultures displayed a typical spheroid pattern of growth, characterized by sphericity of the multicellular structures (=0.92) and high percentage of tight spheroids (exceeding 50%) (Figures 3a and b, Table 2), the amount of tight spheroids in the presence of the SCD1 inhibitor was drastically reduced (10.3% Chi square test: P<0.0001) and the cultures were characterized by high prevalence of irregular cell aggregates (62.8%) of lower sphericity (=0.80) with respect to the untreated cultures (Figures 3b and c).
Taken together these data suggest that SCD1 inhibition has a more pronounced effect on cancer stem cells enriched cultures which organize themselves as three-dimensional (3D) structures, and therefore that this enzyme can be a target specific for cells with cancer-initiating properties.
SCD1 impairment reduces expression of stem cell markers in spheroids
Next, we decided to assess the effect of SCD1 inhibition on the activity of ALDH1A1 enzyme. We generated spheroids in the presence of a siRNA specific for SCD1 and after 72 h, we evaluated ALDH1A1 activity by flow cytometry. Both in NCI-H460 and primary culture Pe o/11, silencing of SCD1 induced a dramatic reduction of ALDH1A1-positive cells (ALDH bright) compared with control siRNA-transfected cells (21.22% versus 10.68% in NCI-H460 and 26.18% versus 11.86% in Pe o/11; Student's t-test: P<0.05) (Figure 4a).
We previously showed that MPEDCC undergo increased expression of stem cell markers Nanog and Oct4, when grown as spheroids.31 Therefore, we analyzed the effect of SCD1 downregulation during spheroid formation on the expression of these markers. Indeed, as shown in Figure 4b both OCT4 and Nanog, mRNA levels were reduced ~10-fold in SCD1-depleted NCI-H460 spheroids (Student's t-test: P<0.01).
A similar effect was also obtained using MF-438 in Pe o/11 and NCI-H460 spheroids cultures. Untreated spheroids showed an elevated ALDH1A1 activity (22.34% in NCI-H460, 28.66% in Pe o/11) as compared with MF-438-treated spheroids (10.11% in NCI-H460, 12.76% in Pe o/11; Student's t-test: P<0.05) (Figure 4c). Importantly, spheroids formed in the presence of the inhibitor dramatically reduced their ALDH1A1 activity, which was restored by oleate addition (Supplementary Figure 3).
SCD1 inhibition induces cellular damage and anoikis in ALDH1A1-positive cells
The ability of cells to grow in conditions of non-adherence is linked to their resistance to anoikis (detachment-induced apoptosis). We previously reported that MPEDCC are resistant to anoikis when grown as 3D cultures and that this is partly dependent on the activation of the BDNF/TrkB axis.31 Hence, to determine the cellular response after treatment with MF-438, we carried out on Pe o/11, a spheroid-forming assay in the presence of the inhibitor and monitored anoikis induction by flow cytometry using Annexin V. As shown in Figure 5a, a striking increased of apoptotic cells was observed in MF-438-treated spheroids (16.2% versus 4.3% Student's t-test: P<0.01).
Transmission electron microscopy revealed that the aberrant spheroids formed in the presence of the SCD1 inhibitor displayed several ultrastructural features of cellular damage, such as cytoplasmic vacuolization, mitochondrial swelling, apoptotic nuclei with areas of marginal, dense-stained chromatin and, although less frequently, nuclear fragmentation (Figure 5b).
Finally, we demonstrated by quantitative immunofluorescence that the anoikis-inducing effect of MF-438 was specific for ALDH1A1-positive cells. Indeed, immunofluorescence analysis performed using the M30 CytoDEATH Fluorescein monoclonal antibody, able to detect the caspase-cleaved cytokeratin 18, showed that the percentage of apoptotic cells positive for the M30 marker was much higher in spheroids treated with MF-438 than in those grown in basal conditions (47.3% versus 2.4% Student's t-test: P<0.0001; Figure 5c, upper panel). Co-immunostaining for M30 and for the stemness marker ALDH1A1 confirmed the very high percentage of ALDH1A1-positive cells (86.2%) in untreated spheroids, whereas treatment with MF-438 induced a clear decrease of ALDH1A1-positive cells (66.8% Student's t-test: P<0.05; Figure 5c lower panel). In addition, the double labeling approach revealed that most of the apoptotic M30-positive cells were also positive for ALDH1A1 (31.6% of M30+/AldhA1+
versus 3.0% of M30+/AldhA1- cells in Pe o/11 MF-438 treated), thus suggesting that the SCD1 inhibitor is selectively killing cells with stem like properties.
SCD1-depleted tumor spheroids have a strongly reduced ability to grow in vivo
To assess the effect of SCD1 inhibition on the capability to form tumors in vivo, we decided to perform in vivo xenograft studies in CD1 mice using the MPEDCC Pe o/11 and the stable NSCLC cell line NCI-H460. For this purpose, spheroids were generated as described above in the absence or in the presence of a 48-h treatment with MF-438. Spheroids were then disaggregated, cells counted and an equivalent number of viable cells from SCD1-inhibited or normal cultures was injected subcutaneously in groups of 10 CD1 mice.
As reported before cells derived from normal Pe o/11 spheroids were more tumorigenic than an equivalent number of cells from adherent cultures (Figure 6a, Student's t-test, P<0.05) probably as a consequence of the enriched number of ALDH1A1-expressing cells in the spheroid cultures.31 In contrast, cells derived from spheroids generated in the presence of MF-438 showed a strongly decreased tumorigenic potential (Figure 6a, Student's t-test: P<0.05). Different results were obtained for NCI-H460 xenografts. In this case, the inhibitory effect of MF-438 was clearly evident in the percentage of tumor engraftment rather than in the size of the tumor masses generated (Supplementary Table 1 and data not shown).
Finally, we monitored ALDH1A1 expression in xenografts by immunostaining of paraffin sections. Interestingly, both NCI-H460 and Pe o/11 xenografts obtained with cells generated from SCD1-inhibited spheroids showed a nearly complete lack of ALDH1A1 staining as compared with control tumors (Figure 6b).

Discussion
Lung cancer is the most common invasive cancer worldwide and includes a broad variety of histological subtypes, which belong to two main groups, small cell lung cancer (SCLC) and non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), which account approximately for 20% and 80% of all lung cancers cases, respectively. In spite of the introduction in the past decades of several targeted therapies, lung cancer remains a major health problem and the primary cause of deaths for cancer.32 The development of more effective therapies, which target central molecules involved in the progression and the proliferation of cancer cells, will be an efficient approach to treat lung cancer.
De novo lipogenesis seems to have a central role in the maintenance and progression of many human cancers. Cancer cells increase their lipid content to support growth, proliferation and survival. SCD1 is the central enzyme involved in the genesis of monounsatureted fatty acids from saturated fatty acids; MUFA and SFA are the most abundant fatty acids in cells, and the ratio SFA/MUFA can affect membrane fluidity and signaling.2, 3 SCD1 is found to be overexpressed in many tumors and an increased number of evidences suggest that its enhanced activity promotes tumor growth.8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16
In this study, we wanted to define the role of SCD1 in lung cancer using as study system spheroids derived from primary tumor cultures and from a stable cell line. Spheroid cultures overexpress markers of staminality, are more resistant to chemotherapies and are able to switch from an epithelial to a mesenchymal phenotype.33 In this paper, we first demonstrated that not all NSCLC cell cultures are able to form tight spheroids when cultured in spheroid medium, and that this ability correlates with the level of activity of the CSC-like marker ALDH1A1.26, 27, 28, 29 The expression of SCD1 was assessed in spheroid cultures, which had an increased ALDH1A1 activity, compared with adherent 2D cultures which, on the contrary, showed a decreased ALDH1A1 activity (data not shown and Mancini et al.30 and Ricci et al.31). We determined a strong upregulation of SCD1 at the protein and RNA levels in 3D cultures. This result led us to explore whether SCD1 expression and activity could impact on spheroid formation as well as ALDH1A1 activity. Using both RNA interference and pharmacological inhibition, we showed that spheroids formation was strongly impaired in the presence of SCD1-inhibiting agents. Moreover, ALDH1A1 activity, measured by flow cytometry, as well as OCT4 and Nanog mRNA levels were consistently downregulated, thus suggesting a direct role of SCD1 in the regulation of factors previously shown to be associated with cancer-initiating cells. Importantly, differentiated 2D cultures are much less sensitive to the inhibitor MF-438, underlining a specific role of SCD1 and MUFA in the maintenance and survival of CSC-like cells. In agreement with this, lipids were previously reported to regulate the self renewal of human embryonal stem cells34 and, recently, Ben-David et al.35 reported that a selective inhibitor of SCD1 was able to induce cell death in human pluripotent stem cells by inducing an ER stress response, which underlined the importance of SCD1 activity and MUFA production for these cell types.
Our data strongly support the notion that SCD1 inhibition is directly responsible for impaired survival of cancer-initiating cells, as also demonstrated by rescue experiments carried out with oleic acid. More importantly, through immunoflourescence analysis, we demonstrated that SCD1 enzymatic inhibition selectively induced apoptosis of ALDH1A1-positive cells. This was further confirmed in in vivo studies, which showed that cells derived from SCD1-inhibited spheroids give rise to smaller tumors with a strongly impaired expression of ALDH1A1. Currently, we do not know the exact mechanism through which SCD1 inhibition causes the selective death of cells with cancer-initiating properties. Mauvoisin et al.36 have recently shown in breast cancer cultures that SCD1 downregulation strongly affects oncogenic signaling through inhibition of GSK3 phosphorylation, impairment of b-catenin translocation to the nucleus, and, as a consequence, of its transactivation capacity and the expression of target genes. It will be interesting to assess whether a similar mechanism can be observed in CSC-like cells form NSCLC.
Our data strongly suggest that SCD1 may be a promising target for lung cancer. Several small molecular weight inhibitors for SCD1, such as MF-438, have been developed during the last years, which have good oral bioavailability and PK properties.17, 18 Commonly observed adverse consequences of prolonged in vivo inhibition of SCD1 are skin damage with dry eye, squinting and alopecia, which are all reversible on discontinuation. These adverse effects may severely limit further development of SCD1 inhibitors for the treatment of cancer. Several approaches to limit side effects of systemic SCD1 inhibitors are under consideration, which include development of partial inhibitors or intermittent dosing. In addition, an important factor to take into account when considering SCD1 as target for cancer therapy and which emerges from our study, is that progenitor and terminally differentiated cancer cells have a low sensitivity to SCD1 inhibition as compared with CSC-like cells. Hence, SCD1 inhibitors cannot be expected to act as cancer-debulking agents but rather as selective tools to impair or delay cancer recurrence.

Materials and Methods
Cell cultures
NCI-H460 cell line was from ATCC (Manassas, VA, USA) and was cultured in RPMI-1640 medium (Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA) supplemented with 10% FBS (Sigma). Primary cell cultures were obtained from individual patients affected by NSCLC using a procedure previously described by Mancini et al.30 Malignant pleural fluid cells were submitted to immunocytochemistry to confirm adenocarcinoma cell origin. Diagnoses were considered 'true positives' if they were in agreement with the consensus cytological diagnosis. Experiments were approved by the Sant' Andrea Hospital Ethics Committee 2010 (504/10). All patients agreed to participate to the study and signed an informed consent form. Each distinct culture was named Pe (from Pleural effusion) followed by a progressive identification letter and a number indicating the year when the culture was originated. As previously reported in Mancini et al.,30 to avoid long periods of adaptations in cell culture all samples were banked in liquid nitrogen at passage 3 (p3), on average 1 month following MPE collection. All further experiments described in this study were conducted with p5 to p10 cells, that is, cells in the initial passages after thawing, unless otherwise specified. Spheroids cultures were obtained from adherent culture plating single cells at clonally density in serum-free medium, as reported by Mancini et al.30 and Giarnieri et al.37
ALDH activity assay
Second generation of spheroids was analyzed for ALDH1A1 enzymatic activity using Aldefluor kit (Stem Cell Technologies, Vancouver, BC, Canada) according to manufacturer's instructions and as previously described.30, 31, 38 Brightly fluorescent ALDH1A1-positive cells were detected in the green fluorescence channel, and samples treated with the specific ALDH1A1 inhibitor DEAB were used as the control to set the gates defining the ALDH1A1-positive region, defined at 0.2%. Samples were also stained with propidium iodide (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) to exclude nonviable cells in flow cytometric analysis. Samples were analyzed in a MACSQuant Analyzer Flow Cytometer (Miltenyi Biotec, Bergisch Gladbach, Germany).
Western blot analysis
Cell lysates obtained using RIPA buffer (Sigma) were separated on SDS/PAGE acrylamide gel and transferred overnight on nitrocellulose membranes. Membranes were blocked with 5% milk, incubated overnight with the appropriate primary antibody, followed by the secondary antibody HRP-conjugated, and developed with ECL western blotting substrate (Promega, Madison, WI, USA). The primary antibodies used were the following: anti-SCD1 (Cell Signaling Technology, Beverly, MA, USA) and anti-GAPDH (Sigma). All results were normalized over GAPDH.
Real time RT-PCR analysis
Total RNA of spheroids and adherent cells was extracted with TRIzol reagent (Life Technologies, Gaithersburg, MD, USA). A total of 200 mg of RNA was digested with DNAse I (Invitrogen) and reverse-transcribed with Superscript first-strand synthesis system (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Real-time PCR was carried out with SYBR Select Master Mix (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). GAPDH was included for the normalization of the real time RT-PCR.
The primers used for individual genes were:
Oct4-F: 5'-GTGGAGAGCAACTCCGATG-3',
Oct4-R: 5'-TGCTCCAGCTTCTCCTTCTC-3'
Nanog-F: 5'-ATTCAGGACAGCCCTGATTCTTC-3',
Nanog-R: 5'-TTTTTGCGACACTCTTCTCTGC-3'
SCD-1-R: 5'-TTCTTACACGACCACCACCA-3'
SCD-1-F: 5'-GCAGG-GGGAACCAGTATGA-3'
GAPDH-F: 5'-GGTATCGTGGAAGGACTCATGAC-3',
GAPDH-R: 5'-ATGCCAGTGAGCTTCCCGTCAGC-3'
Apoptosis assay
Analysis of apoptosis in adherent and spheroid cells was carried out by flow cytometry using Alexa fluor 488-Annexin V (Invitrogen). Second generation of spheroid cultures were treated with or without MF-438 (1 mM) for 72 h. Treated cells were collected and incubated with Annexin V for 15 min in the dark according to the recommendation of the manufacturer. Samples were analyzed using MacsQuant Flow Cytometer (Miltenyi Biotec)
MTT assay
Cellular growth in the presence or absence of MF-438 was evaluated using MTT assay. Adherent cultures were plated in 96 well/plate and after 24 h were treated with the indicate concentration of MF-438. After 72 h of treatment, MTT (Sigma) was added to the wells and DMSO (Sigma) was used to solubilize the MTT-formazan product. Absorbance was measured at 570 nm using the Multiskan EX Microplate Photometer (Thermo Scientific Dharmacon, Lafayette, CO, USA). The dose-response curves could be plotted with 50% inhibitory concentration (IC50), and were defined with KaleidaGraph software.
Spheroid-forming assay
Cells were plated as single cells in ultralow attachment plates (Corning Incorporated, Corning, NY, USA) and were grown in sphere medium with 0.8% methylcellulose (Sigma) with or without MF-438 inhibitor at the indicated concentrations for 7-8 days. For rescue experiments, Oleic Acid-BSA (Sigma) was used at 1 mM. We performed spheroid formation assay with second generation of spheroids plated at 1500-2000 cells/well in 96-well plates. The number of formed spheroids was counted under an inverted microscope.
siRNA transfection
Small interfering RNA-targeting SCD-1 (Sigma) or control siRNA-A (sc-37007; Santa Cruz, CA, USA) was transfected into adherent cells using Lipofectamine RNAiMAX Reagents (Invitrogen), according to the manufacturer's recommendation. After 48 h from transfection, cultures were grown in sphere medium and allowed to form spheroids.
Chemicals
MF-438 SCD-1 inhibitor was kindly provided by Merck (Darmstadt, Germany). A939572 was purchased from Biovision (Milpitas, CA, USA). Oleic acid-BSA was from Sigma-Aldrich (Milan, Italy).
Morphometric analysis
For the 3D morphological analysis of tumor spheroids, samples were examined under an Axiovert 200 inverted microscope (Zeiss, Oberkochen, Germany) equipped with differential interference contrast optics. For quantitative image analysis, digital micrographs of at least 200 multicellular structures and single cells for each condition were randomly captured from three different experiments using an AxioCam MRm CCD camera (Zeiss).
Projected area (A), perimeter (P) and two orthogonal diameters (a and b) were measured for each 3D structures using the Axiovision software (Zeiss). Sphericity, volume and size was subsequently calculated according to the methods proposed by Kelm et al.39 and Vinci et al.40
The sphericity of each structure was expressed calculating the Shape Factor: .
The volume (mm3) was corrected for Shape Factor and calculated applying: .
The size (mm) was determined calculating the geometric mean diameter: .
All 3D structures were also categorized according to their morphology and classified as follows: tight spheroids (densely packed spheres with almost indiscernible individual cells), irregular aggregates (two or more cells organized in loose or compact aggregates that do not form the typical spheroid structure) and single floating cells.
Transmission electron microscopy
Cultures, treated or not with MF-438 1 mM as above, were washed three times in PBS and fixed with 2% glutaraldehyde in PBS for 2 h at 4 degC. Samples were postfixed with 1% osmium tetroxide in veronal acetate buffer (pH 7.4) for 1 h at 25 degC, stained with uranyl acetate (5 mg/ml) for 1 h at 25 degC, dehydrated in acetone and embedded in Epon 812 (EMbed 812, Electron Microscopy Science, Hatfield, PA, USA). Ultrathin sections were examined unstained or poststained with uranyl acetate and lead hydroxide, under a Morgagni 268D transmission electron microscope (FEI, Hillsboro, OR, USA) equipped with a Mega View II charge-coupled device camera (SIS, Soft Imaging System GmbH, Munster, Germany) and analyzed with AnalySIS software (SIS).
Immunofluorescence
Cultures, untreated or treated with MF-438 1 mM as above, were washed in PBS and fixed with methanol for 4 min at -20 degC. To detect the apoptotic cells, spheroids were labeled with M30 CytoDEATH Fluorescein monoclonal antibody (1 : 150 in PBS, Roche, Mannheim, Germany). To verify the apoptotic versus the stemness phenotype, spheroids were double labeled with M30 CytoDEATH Fluorescein and with anti-ALDH1A1 primary rabbit monoclonal antibody (1 : 50 in PBS) followed by goat anti-rabbit IgG-Texas Red (1 : 200 in PBS; Jackson Immunoresearch Laboratories, West Grove, PA, USA). Nuclei were visualized using 4,6-diamido-2-phenylindole dihydrochloride (DAPI) (1 : 10 000 in PBS, Sigma Chemical Co., St. Louis, MO, USA). Fluorescence signals were analyzed by conventional fluorescence or by scanning in series of 0.5-mm sequential optical sections with an ApoTome System (Zeiss) connected with an Axiovert 200 inverted microscope (Zeiss); image analysis and 3D reconstruction of the optical sections was then performed using the Axiovision software (Zeiss). The percentage of M30 and/or AldhA1-positive cells was analyzed counting for each treatment a total of 500 cells, observed in ten microscopic fields randomly taken from three different experiments.
In vivo studies
For xenograft assay, single-cell suspension was obtained by enzymatic digestion of the spheroids using different cell numbers in a volume of 100 ml of a 50% GFR Matrigel (BD Biosciences, Franklin Lakes, NJ, USA). In particular, Pe o/11 and NCI-H460 spheroids generated for 48 h in the absence or in the presence of SCD1 inhibitor (500 nM) were injected subcutaneously into the right flank of ten CD1 nude mice for each group. 1 x 104 viable single cells for NCI-H460 and 1 x 105 viable single cells for Pe o/11, respectively, were used. Tumors were measured with a caliper at weekly intervals and tumor volumes were calculated using the formula: (length x width2)/2. After ~70 days from injection, mice were killed and tumors excised for immunohistochemistry analysis.
All studies have been performed in accordance with 'Directive 86/609/EEC on the protection of Animals used for Experimental and other scientific purposes and made effective in Italy by the Legislative Decree DL 116/92 as described in Ricci et al.31 All animal protocols used for this study were reviewed and approved by Takis Ethical Committee (TKEC-2012-02).
Immunohistochemistry
Paraffin sections of tumors generated subcutaneously in CD1 nude mice after injection of NCI-H460 cell line or of Pe o/11 primary cell culture were immunostained for ALDH1A1 (clone EP1933Y, Epitomics, Burlingame, CA, USA) using an automated immunostainer (DAKO, Glostrup, Denmark).
Statistical methods
For almost all experiments, statistics were performed using two-tailed Student's t-test. All values shown in the text and figures are +-S.D., where n=3. P-values <0.05 were assumed as statistically significant.
For the morphometric analysis, to compare variables that do not assume Gaussian distribution, Mann-Whitney non-parametric test was used. Data are presented with the Tukey box-and-whisker plot, where the central box represents the interquartile ranges (IR; 25th to 75th percentile), the middle line represents the median, and the horizontal lines represent the minimum and the maximum value of observation range. Values are expressed as median+-IR. To compare variables that assume normal distribution, Student's t-test was used and values are expressed as mean+-S.E. from three independent experiments. Chi-square test was used to compare categorical variables. P-values<0.05 were assumed as statistically significant.
For the in vivo studies using NCI-H460 cell line, statistical analysis was performed using Fisher's exact test.
