[Abstract, Methods, Results, Discussion]

Using the theory of coevolution to predict protein-protein interactions in non-small cell lung cancer. Systems biology has become an effective approach for understanding the molecular mechanisms underlying the development of lung cancer. In this study, sequences of 100 non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)-related proteins were downloaded from the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) databases. The Theory of Coevolution was then used to build a protein-protein interaction (PPI) network of NSCLC. Adopting the reverse thinking approach, we analyzed the NSCLC proteins one at a time. Fifteen key proteins were identified and categorized into a special protein family F (K), which included Cyclin D1 (CCND1), E-cadherin (CDH1), Cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 2A (CDKN2A), chemokine (C-X-C motif) ligand 12 (CXCL12), epidermal growth factor (EGF), epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), TNF receptor superfamily, member 6 (FAS), FK506 binding protein 12-rapamycin associated protein 1 (FRAP1), O-6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase (MGMT), parkinson protein 2, E3 Ubiquitin protein ligase (PARK2), phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN), calcium channel voltage-dependent alpha 2/delta subunit 2 (CACNA2D2), tubulin beta class I (TUBB), SWI/SNF-related, matrix-associated, actin-dependent regulator of chromatin, subfamily a, member 2 (SMARCA2), and wingless-type MMTV integration site family, member 7A (WNT7A). Seven key nodes of the sub-network were identified, which included PARK2, WNT7A, SMARCA2, FRAP1, CDKN2A, CCND1, and EGFR. The PPI predictions of EGFR-EGF, PARK2-FAS, PTEN-FAS, and CACNA2D2-CDH1 were confirmed experimentally by retrieving the Biological General Repository for Interaction Datasets (BioGRID) and PubMed databases. We proposed that the 7 proteins could serve as potential diagnostic molecular markers for NSCLC. In accordance with the developmental mode of lung cancer established by Sekine et al., we assumed that the occurrence and development of lung cancer were linked not only to gene loss in the 3p region (WNT7A, 3p25) and genetic mutations in the 9p region but also to similar events in the regions of 1p36.2 (FRAP1), 6q25.2-q27 (PARK2), and 11q13 (CCND1). Lastly, the invasion or metastasis of lung cancer happened.

Data and Methods
Data sources
Sequences of 100 genes and 100 related coding proteins related to NSCLC were downloaded from the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) databases (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/).
Coevolution Theory
The coevolution theory is an approach used to study the PPIs that are based on the coevolutionary relationships of proteins. Coevolution describes the evolutionary choice that enables similar proteins to either co-exist or not co-exist within multiple genomes. If several proteins exist in a macromolecular component, or participate in a metabolic or signal transduction process, the relationships between these proteins are known as "functional linkages".
The premise of coevolution is that proteins that have similar functions and effects also have similar phylogenetic trees. The sequences of lung cancer-related proteins are compared with homologous sequences from other species, and the distance matrix between these proteins is calculated using Bioedit, a free software released by Tom Hall. The Evolution Theory speculates that two queried proteins may have a common evolutionary ancestor and serve as the basis for sequence alignments, which determine whether there exists sufficient similarity between two sequences. Pairwise sequence alignment determines whether there exists a molecular evolutionary relationship between two sequences by comparing similar regions and conserved sites. Then, based upon the alignment, the distance matrix determines the distance relationships between the two proteins. The distance can be calculated by equation (1),
where d (i, j) represents the distance between sequence i and sequence j; S (i, j) represents the weighted sum of the scores for each alignment position of sequences i and j; Sr (i, j) represents the weighted sum of the alignment score after the randomization of sequences i and j; and Smax (i, j) represents the maximum possible alignment score between two protein sequences (when the two sequences are the same, the maximum is used). The normalized distance between two sequences is represented by a calculated numerical value between 0 and 1; if the two sequences are identical, the distance will be 0. If the two sequences are greatly different, the distance value nears 1[6].
Upon calculating the distances between lung cancer-related proteins and the homologous proteins of other species, including Bos Taurus, Rattus norvegicus, Canis familaris, Mus musculus and Danio rio, the corresponding evolutionary distance matrix can be generated and used to predict the possibility of the interaction between two proteins. Equation (2) is used to calculate the correlation coefficients (r) between the evolutionary distance matrixes of the proteins, (2),
where r is the linear correlation coefficient; n=(N2-N)/2, where n is the number of sequences entered into the multiple sequence alignment, and N is the number of elements that the matrix contained; Ri is the element of the first matrix, and Si is the element of the second matrix; and R and S are the average values of Ri and Si, respectively[7].
The following steps were used to calculate the r values of NSCLC-related proteins.
Collection of homologous sequences--A search of the NCBI protein database was performed to obtain the protein sequences required to build the evolutionary trees. Each of these sequences then served as a template in a search for homologous protein sequences in other species, which was subjected to the condition P(N)<1 x 10-5 and performed using the related protein database provided by BLAST.
Generation of the distance matrix--First, a protein present in human NSCLC and homologous proteins identified in other species were classified into the same group. Then, groups of proteins were arranged using the ClustalW software, in which the exported arrangement results were adjusted to ensure that each protein in the inner groups had a similar order. Lastly, the Bioedit software was used to calculate the corresponding protein distance matrix for each group of proteins. Each matrix represents a different evolutionary relationship between homologous protein sequences within the groups.
Calculation of the corresponding correlation coefficient--Equation (2) was used to calculate the corresponding r value between NSCLC proteins, which was then used to measure the strength of the PPI.

Results
The prediction of NSCLC protein-protein interactions
The eligible homologous sequences of NSCLC-related proteins were obtained by searching the related protein databases. Ninety-two NSCLC protein sequences in Homo sapiens consisted of homologous sequences with P(N) < 1 x 10-5. We obtained a total of 4 186 pairs of PPIs by computation (Table 1).
As shown in Table 1, 67.2% of NSCLC-related PPIs possessed an r value greater than 0.82, and 77.3% possessed an r value greater than 0.50, indicating that most of the proteins would interact strongly with each other.
The PPI network that was developed included 92 NSCLC-related proteins (Figure 1). Unfortunately, most of the proteins interacted closely, which made it difficult to divide them into functional modules. According to the Information Theory, information that is too complicated cannot provide valid or useful data.
Therefore, an alternate approach was adopted in which only the proteins with an r value less than 0.50 were analyzed. We identified the protein interactions one at a time. Fifteen specific proteins were found to possess predominantly similar interactions, including Cyclin D1 (CCND1), E-cadherin (CDH1), Cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 2A (CDKN2A), chemokine (C-X-C motif) ligand 12 (CXCL12), epidermal growth factor (EGF), epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), TNF receptor superfamily, member 6 (FAS ), FK506 binding protein 12-rapamycin associated protein 1 (FRAP1), O-6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase (MGMT), parkinson protein 2, E3 Ubiquitin protein ligase (PARK2), phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN), calcium channel voltage-dependent alpha 2/delta subunit 2 (CACNA2D2), tubulin beta class I (TUBB), SWI/SNF-related, matrix-associated, actin-dependent regulator of chromatin, subfamily a, member 2 (SMARCA2), and wingless-type MMTV integration site family, member 7A (WNT7A). The functions and annotations of these proteins were retrieved (Table 2).
Although the majority of the 15 proteins possessed an r value less than 0.50, the analysis demonstrated that some calculated r values were less than 0.10 or negative. Surprisingly, there were exceptions in which some proteins had larger r values when evaluated with other specific proteins. For example, the r values between PARK2 and CCND1, CDKN2A, EGFR, and FAS were all greater than 0.36, whereas most of the r values between PARK2 and other proteins were less than 0.1 or were negative. Only the r value between TUBB and CXCL12 was greater than 0.35. Although the r value between CACNA2D2 and CDH1 reached 0.5889, most of the r values between CACNA2D2 and other proteins were negative. Each of these exceptional cases (including proteins with an r value greater than 0.35) were present in the 15 proteins mentioned previously (Table 3). To provide experimental evidence that supports the PPI prediction, we researched the Biological General Repository for Interaction Datasets (BioGRID) and PubMed databases and found experiments that confirmed the PPIs between EGFR-EGF, PARK2-FAS, PTEN-FAS, and CACNA2D2-CDH1.
Figure 1.
Protein-protein interaction network of 92 non-small cell lung cancer-related proteins
The results of the analysis indicated that these 15 proteins could be categorized into a special family, which we defined as F(K). The proteins of F(K) may possess unique associations that contribute to the development of NSCLC, and it is likely that these proteins are members of a distinct pathway (Table 2). We built a PPI sub-network for F(K) based on the data in Table 3.
The PPI sub-network consisted of several key nodes, which included PARK2, WNT7A, SMARCA2, FRAP1, CDKN2A, CCND1, and EGFR (Figure 2). Each of the 7 proteins possessed more than 5 interactions. These 7 proteins may play important roles in the development of NSCLC, and these proteins may serve not only as valuable molecular markers for the early diagnosis of lung cancer but also as potential targets for the clinical treatment of lung cancer.
Inferring lung cancer development mode combined with the PPI sub-network
In 1998, through a prospective molecular pathology research, Sekine et al.[8] defined an occurrence process of genetic variation mode for lung cancer. Sekine believed that lung cancer first developed from the gene loss in the chromosome 3p region, followed by the genetic mutation of the 9p region (the P16 gene is located in the 9p12 region). Lastly, modification of the P53 or RAS gene occurs[8].
In the current study, the NCBI databases were thoroughly searched to identify the chromosomal localization of the genes encoding the proteins of interest (Figure 2). However, the genetic mutation mode in which lung cancer occurred and developed was found to be particularly complicated (Table 4). Upon evaluation of the 7 key node proteins (Figure 2), the occurrence and development of lung cancer was linked not only with gene loss in the 3p region (WNT7A, 3p25) and genetic mutation in the 9p region but also with similar events in the regions of 1p36.2 (FRAP1), 6q25.2-q27 (PARK2), and 11q13 (CCND1). Lastly, the invasion or metastasis of lung cancer happened (P15, P16, C-MYC, C-erbB-2, and EGFR genetic mutations, which include 10q and additional regions).
Figure 2.
The protein-protein interaction subnetwork of F(K)

Discussion
Presently, the most challenging aspect of bioinformatics is the prediction of PPIs. However, compared with most experimental approaches, simulation and calculation approaches cost less and enable predictions to be made more efficiently. In recent years, many bioinformatics methods have been adapted to PPI calculations and have been categorized into four types of methods: methods based on genomic information; methods based on evolutionary relationships; methods based on protein sequences (ab initio); and methods based on protein 3-dimensional structural information. However, the primary problems are inconsistencies that arise from comparing methods that use different databases and the use of databases that may be unreliable[9].
The systems biology approach has been applied to study the early molecular mechanisms of lung cancer to identify specific molecular markers with high sensitivity. These specific molecular markers are of great significance in molecular staging, early diagnosis, prediction of recurrence after tumor resection, correct judgment of prognosis, and choosing appropriate treatment programs for lung cancer patients.
Based on the Coevolution Theory, we predicted PPIs that occur in NSCLC and generated a total of 4186 pairs of PPI data via performing calculations with 92 protein sequences. It was found that 77.3% of the r values of protein interaction associated with NSCLC were greater than 0.50, indicating that most of the proteins had strong interactions with each other. By adopting an alternate approach, 15 key proteins were identified and categorized into a special protein family, F(K), which included CCND1, CDH1, CDKN2A, CSCL12, EGF, EGFR, FAS, FRAP1, MGMT, PARK2, PTEN, CACNA2D2, TUBB, SMARCA2, and WNT7A.
The PPI sub-network of F(K) was constructed. A preliminary analysis determined 7 key node proteins: PARK2, WNT7A, SMARCA2, FRAP1, CDKN2A, CCND1, and EGFR.
The PPIs of EGFR-EGF, PARK2-FAS, PTEN-FAS, and CACNA2D2-CDH1 were confirmed by retrieving information from the BioGRID and PubMed databases[10]. EGFR-EGF participates in the regulation of receptor endocytosis[11] and receptor phosphorylation at Ser1039 and Thr1041. EGFR mutants exhibit enhanced tyrosine kinase activity in response to EGF and increased sensitivity to inhibition by gefitinib[12]. Additionally, PARK2-FAS regulates CDK4 activity via a novel CDK4-binding protein and appears to function as a growth factor sensor that may facilitate the formation and activation of Cyclin D-CDK complexes in the presence of inhibitory levels of INK4 proteins[13]. These proteins may play important roles in the development of NSCLC. These proteins may potentially serve as molecular markers for the early diagnosis and targets for the clinical treatment of lung cancer[14]. Accordingly, research has demonstrated that EGFR and FAS are very important molecular markers for NSCLC[15].
With reference to the development mode of lung cancer established by Sekine et al.[8], we proposed a detailed evolution mode that incorporated the results of the PPI sub-network. This mode indicates that lung cancer may arise due to the loss of WNT7A in the 3p25 region, followed by the genetic mutation of CDKN2A in the 9p21 region and SMARCA2 in the 9p22.3 region. Lung cancer might also be linked to the loss of genes or genetic mutations that occur in the 1p36.2 region (FRAP1), the 6p25.2-q27 region (PARK2), or multiple mutations in the 10q region and the 11q13 region (CCND1). Subsequently, the genetic mutation of P53 or RAS would then occur[16].
Currently, the coevolution approach is widely applied to predict PPIs. However, the analysis on the interaction prediction predominantly focused on prokaryotes. There are several key assumptions that the coevolution approach applies to predict the PPIs of eukaryotes. First, compared with the proteome of single-cell prokaryotes, the eukaryotic proteome consists of more proteins and more complex PPIs. Under these conditions, it becomes difficult to analyze and predict the whole interactome. Therefore, human NSCLC-related proteins were selected because they were fewer in number, making it relatively easier to analyze the protein sequences. The biological functions of these proteins predominantly include cell communication, signal transduction, and cell cycle regulation[17]. Understanding these interactions is very important for researching cancer detection and treatment. Second, the eukaryotic genome is very large, and the complete genomic sequences of vertebrate species are limited. Due to the limited sources of homologous protein sequences, it would be difficult to build multi-gene trees. Such restrictions would affect the study scope and accuracy of the coevolution approach used in the proteomic analysis of eukaryotes. Third, the phylogenetic relationships of eukaryotes, especially those of higher animals, would have greater similarity. There would exist only small differences between proteomes, and no gene would exhibit the phenomenon of horizontal transfer of non-normal genetic variation. These features make the application of the coevolution method more simple, more accurate and reliable.
This study demonstrates the need for more direct experimental evidence to validate the PPIs calculated by the coevolution method because the results may include a high rate of false positive or negative data. Additionally, the calculation methods need to be further improved.
