[Abstract, Methods, Results, Discussion, Mixed, Mixed]

The Diesel Exhaust in Miners Study: A Nested Case-Control Study of Lung
Cancer and Diesel Exhaust. Background Most studies of the association between diesel exhaust exposure and lung cancer suggest a modest, but consistent, increased risk. However, to our knowledge, no study to date has had quantitative data on historical diesel exposure coupled with adequate sample size to evaluate the exposure-response relationship between diesel exhaust and lung cancer. Our purpose was to evaluate the relationship between quantitative estimates of exposure to diesel exhaust and lung cancer mortality after adjustment for smoking and other potential confounders.   Methods We conducted a nested case-control study in a cohort of 12 315 workers in eight non-metal mining facilities, which included 198 lung cancer deaths and 562 incidence density-sampled control subjects. For each case subject, we selected up to four control subjects, individually matched on mining facility, sex, race/ethnicity, and birth year (within 5 years), from all workers who were alive before the day the case subject died. We estimated diesel exhaust exposure, represented by respirable elemental carbon (REC), by job and year, for each subject, based on an extensive retrospective exposure assessment at each mining facility. We conducted both categorical and continuous regression analyses adjusted for cigarette smoking and other potential confounding variables (eg, history of employment in high-risk occupations for lung cancer and a history of respiratory disease) to estimate odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs). Analyses were both unlagged and lagged to exclude recent exposure such as that occurring in the 15 years directly before the date of death (case subjects)/reference date (control subjects). All statistical tests were two-sided.   Results We observed statistically significant increasing trends in lung cancer risk with increasing cumulative REC and average REC intensity. Cumulative REC, lagged 15 years, yielded a statistically significant positive gradient in lung cancer risk overall (P trend = .001); among heavily exposed workers (ie, above the median of the top quartile [REC >= 1005 mg/m3-y]), risk was approximately three times greater (OR = 3.20, 95% CI = 1.33 to 7.69) than that among workers in the lowest quartile of exposure. Among never smokers, odd ratios were 1.0, 1.47 (95% CI = 0.29 to 7.50), and 7.30 (95% CI = 1.46 to 36.57) for workers with 15-year lagged cumulative REC tertiles of less than 8, 8 to less than 304, and 304 mg/m3-y or more, respectively. We also observed an interaction between smoking and 15-year lagged cumulative REC (P interaction = .086) such that the effect of each of these exposures was attenuated in the presence of high levels of the other.   Conclusion Our findings provide further evidence that diesel exhaust exposure may cause lung cancer in humans and may represent a potential public health burden.

Materials and MethodsCohort Design and Follow UpEight non-metal mining facilities (three potash, three trona, one limestone, and one salt
[halite]) were selected from all US non-metal mining facilities with at least 50 employees
who were considered to have had high air levels of diesel exhaust underground but low
levels of potential occupational confounders (ie, radon, silica, asbestos) (12). Eligible subjects included all workers who were
ever employed in a blue-collar job for at least 1 year after introduction of diesel
equipment into the mining facility (year of introduction: 1947-1967 across the eight
facilities) until the end of follow-up on December 31, 1997. The cohort consisted of
12 315 workers with a total of 278 041 person-years of follow-up. More
detailed information on the cohort can be found in the accompanying article on the cohort
study (12).Case Subject Definition and IdentificationVital status of each cohort member was ascertained through December 31, 1997, by linkage
with the National Death Index Plus (NDI Plus) (http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/ndi.htm)
and Social Security Administration mortality files. Cause of death information was
obtained from NDI Plus or from death certificates (for deaths occurring before the
introduction of NDI Plus). A total of 217 deaths were identified with lung cancer
(International Classification of Diseases-O code 162) specified as
either the underlying or contributing cause on the death certificate. We attempted to
retrieve pathology reports and diagnostic slides for all case subjects, which proved to be
challenging because 85% of the case subjects had died more than 10 years before we
contacted the hospital. After repeated attempts, we successfully obtained pathology
reports or slides for 70 of the 170 case subjects for whom we obtained consent to access
medical records. When the pathology report or diagnostic slides were available, the
diagnosis of lung cancer was confirmed through review by an expert pathologist (W. D.
Travis), which resulted in the exclusion of one case subject as "unlikely" to
have had lung cancer. Of the 217 eligible case subjects identified, we interviewed 213
(98.1%) of their next of kin.Control Subject Selection for the Nested Case-Control StudyBased on incidence density sampling, we selected up to four control subjects for each
lung cancer case subject by random sampling from all members of the study cohort who were
alive before the day the case subject died. With this design, all cohort members were
eligible to serve as control subjects for more than one case subject, and case subjects
before death were eligible to serve as control subjects for other case subjects who died
earlier (23 control subjects went on to become case subjects at a later point in time).
Control subjects were individually matched to each case subject on mining facility, sex,
race/ethnicity (ie, white, African American, American Indian, Hispanic), and birth year
(within 5 years). In the analysis, estimates of diesel exposure and potential confounders
(eg, cigarette smoking, employment in other high-risk occupations for lung cancer, and
history of nonmalignant respiratory disease) for each control subject were truncated at
the date of death of the matched case subject. We identified 650 eligible control subjects
and interviewed 611 (94.0%) of them or their next of kin (if the control subject was
deceased or too ill for interview). Of the next of kin who were interviewed, 55% were
adult children, 31% were spouses or former spouses, 6% were siblings, and 8% were other
relatives (with the exception of two friends/co-workers).The InterviewLiving control subjects (n = 222) and next of kin of lung cancer case subjects (n
= 198) and ill or deceased control subjects (n = 340) were interviewed using
a computer-assisted telephone interview (as explained below, an additional 15 case
subjects and 49 control subjects were excluded from analysis). The interview was designed
to collect information about the subject's demographics, smoking history (both
active and passive), lifetime occupational history, medical history, family medical
history, and usual adult diet. We obtained information on all jobs held for 12 months or
longer since the age of 16. For each job held at a study mining facility, we collected
information on the use of respiratory protective equipment (eg, respirators and masks) and
the mining facility location where each subject spent most of his or her time (surface or
underground) to supplement information obtained from the subject's company employment
record. We also collected information about all jobs held before and after employment at
the study mining facilities, including whether the subjects operated or worked near diesel
engines.We compared data obtained from next of kin of deceased control subjects to those obtained
from direct interviews with living control subjects for several key variables (eg,
cigarette smoking, history of employment in a high-risk occupation for lung cancer, and
history of nonmalignant respiratory disease). In general, data obtained from next of kin
were similar to those obtained from directly interviewed control subjects. For cigarette
smoking, the percentages of direct vs next-of-kin interviews by smoking category were as
follows: never smoker, 27% vs 28%; occasional smoker, 3% vs 2%; former smoker of less than
one pack per day, 17% vs 17%; former smoker of one to less than two packs per day, 31% vs
24%; former smoker of two or more packs per day, 11% vs 6%; current smoker of less than
one pack per day, 1% vs 3%; current smoker of one to less than two packs per day, 9% vs
14%; and current smoker of two or more packs per day, 1% vs 6%, respectively. Living
control subjects and next of kin of dead control subjects reported similar proportions of
"ever smokers" (73% and 72%, respectively). As expected, deceased control
subjects had a slightly higher proportion of current smokers of one or more packs per day
than living control subjects (20% and 10%, respectively). This observation is consistent
with the reported cause of death; 80% of control subjects who were current smokers of one
or more packs per day died of a smoking-related cause compared with 60% of control
subjects who never smoked.This study was approved by the Institutional Review Boards of the National Cancer
Institute, the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH), and Westat,
Inc. All interviewees provided verbal informed consent before the interview, and next of
kin of case subjects provided written consent to obtain medical records and pathology
materials.Diesel Exhaust Exposure AssessmentThe eight facilities in the study had both underground (ore extraction) and surface (ore
processing) operations. Underground workers were exposed to diesel exhaust primarily from
ore extraction, haulage, and personnel transport vehicles. Surface workers generally had
little to no contact with diesel equipment, although some had low levels of diesel
exposure from the operation of heavy equipment or diesel trucks or because they worked
near diesel equipment.Respirable elemental carbon (REC), a component of diesel exhaust, is considered the best
index of diesel exhaust in underground mining (13). The methods we used to develop quantitative estimates of historical exposure
to REC at each mining facility have been described in detail (14-18). Briefly, the
exposure assessors (P. A. Stewart, R. Vermeulen, J. B. Coble) developed location- and job
title-specific estimates, by year, back to the year of the introduction of diesel
equipment in each facility, blinded to mortality outcomes. The estimates were based on
measurements from 1998 to 2001 DEMS industrial hygiene surveys at each working mining
facility, past Mine Safety and Health Administration enforcement surveys, other
measurement data, and information from company records and interviews with long-term
workers. The same REC estimates were used to develop quantitative estimates of average
intensity and cumulative REC exposure for subjects in both this and the cohort study
(12).A small percentage of subjects in the nested case-control study worked at more than
one study facility (ie, 5.9% worked at two facilities and 0.7% worked at three). For these
workers, their exposure metrics were based on diesel exposure at all relevant study
facilities. Control subjects working in more than one facility were matched to case
subjects on the facility where the control subject worked the longest. In
facility-specific analyses, workers at multiple facilities were assigned to the facility
where they worked the longest.Statistical AnalysisThe effect of diesel exhaust exposure on risk of dying of lung cancer was quantified by
the odds ratio. Odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals were estimated by conditional
logistic regression. Quartile and tertile cut points for exposure metrics were chosen to
achieve approximately equal numbers of case subjects in each category. In all tables,
statistical models included a term for exposure (ie, quartiles of average REC intensity
[mg/m3], cumulative REC exposure [mg/m3-y], or duration of
exposure [years]). Final models also included terms for potential confounding factors.
These included a variable that combined cigarette smoking status and smoking intensity
with location worked because initial analyses indicated that the risk of lung cancer from
cigarette smoking was different for surface and underground workers (ie, smoking status
[never, former, current], by smoking intensity [unknown or occasional smoker, <1, 1 to
<2, >=2 packs per day], by location [surface only, ever underground]). Former smoker
was defined as a case subject who had stopped smoking more than 2 years before their date
of death and a control subject who had stopped smoking more than 2 years before the
matched case subject's date of death. We included intensity smoked rather than
duration smoked or pack-years in our final models; however, results were similar when
either of these metrics was used to control for smoking (data not shown). The addition of
a variable representing the interaction of location worked and smoking to models
statistically significantly improved analogous models that included smoking without
location (range of P values for the likelihood ratio test =
.011-.064 for average REC intensity and cumulative REC, unlagged and lagged). The
final models also included two other potential confounders: employment in a high-risk
occupation for lung cancer for at least 10 years (ie, miner outside the study mining
facilities, truck driver, welder, machinery mechanic, painter) and history of nonmalignant
respiratory disease diagnosed at least 5 years before death/reference date (ie, primarily
pneumoconiosis, emphysema, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, silicosis, tuberculosis
but excluding asthma, pneumonia, and bronchitis because the latter three diseases were not
associated with lung cancer in our study). Other potential confounders [ie, duration of
cigar smoking; frequency of pipe smoking; environmental tobacco smoke; family history of
lung cancer in a first-degree relative; education; body mass index based on usual adult
weight and height; leisure time physical activity; diet; estimated cumulative exposure to
radon, asbestos, silica, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) from non-diesel sources,
and respirable dust in the study facility based on air measurement and other data (14)] were evaluated but not included in the final
models because they had little or no impact on odds ratios (ie, inclusion of these factors
in the final models changed point estimates for diesel exposure by <=10%). Exposure
levels to other possible confounding exposures in these facilities, such as arsenic,
nickel, and cadmium, were not estimated because of very low levels and generally
non-detectable measurement results (14).To test for trend, a Wald test was performed, treating the median value for each level of
the categorical exposure variable among the control subjects as continuous in the model.
To test for interaction between two risk factors, we added a cross-product term to the
logistic model and conducted a likelihood ratio test between the model with and without
the cross-product term. All statistical tests were two-sided.We explored quantitative patterns in odds ratios for both continuous average REC
intensity and continuous cumulative REC exposure, denoted by d, by
fitting various standard models for occupational epidemiological data, including a
log-linear model, OR(d) = exp(b d); a power
model, OR(d) = d
b; a linear model, OR(d) = 1 + b
d; and a linear-exponential model, OR(d) = 1
+ b d exp(g d). All models were adjusted
for the same set of potential confounding factors as described above. We fitted models
over the full range of exposure and, for comparative purposes, over a restricted range of
lower exposure levels. We compared deviances (a measure of model fit) with the null model
that omitted REC exposure, in which larger changes in deviance denoted greater
improvements in fit (Supplementary Table 1, available online).For average REC intensity and cumulative REC exposure, we evaluated lag intervals by
excluding exposure occurring 0, 3, ... , 25 years (by 2-year intervals) before the
death/reference date and compared changes in model deviance to a model that omitted REC
exposure. The optimal lag interval (ie, the largest improvement in model fit) occurred for
a lag between 13-17 years for average REC intensity and 15 years for cumulative REC
exposure (Supplementary Figure 1, available online). For consistency, we used a
15-year lag for both exposure metrics in the final analyses.Of the 213 lung cancer case subjects and 611 control subjects interviewed for study,
subjects were excluded for the following reasons: one case subject was identified as
"unlikely" to have had lung cancer based on review of pathology material; 10
case subjects did not have any eligible control subjects (because of race/ethnicity for
nine nonwhite or Hispanic case subjects and age for one case subject who was 88 years
old); 39 control subjects were incorrectly matched on race/ethnicity based on more
accurate information obtained during interview; four case subjects and five control
subjects were found ineligible for inclusion in the cohort based on a final review of
company work histories by NIOSH (12); and five
control subjects were not suitable matches to any case subject because the original
matched case subject was found to be ineligible for study. The final analytic dataset
included 198 case subjects and 562 control subjects (666 control subjects for analytical
purposes because some cohort members served as control subjects for more than one case
subject). This analytical dataset was predominantly male, with only two female case
subjects and eight female control subjects.

ResultsOdds ratios for potential confounders (except cigarette smoking) and lung cancer risk are
shown in Table 1. A statistically significant
increased risk of lung cancer was observed for workers employed at least 10 years in
occupations at high-risk for lung cancer (OR = 1.75, 95% CI = 1.06 to 2.91)
(Table 1) and those with a history of
nonmalignant respiratory disease for at least 5 years before death/reference date (OR
= 2.15, 95% CI = 1.21 to 3.82) (Table
1). The elevated risk among those with nonmalignant respiratory disease less than 5
years before death may have been reflective of the early stages of lung cancer.
Statistically nonsignificant increased risks were observed for workers who had a family
history of lung cancer, smoked cigars for 10 or more years, lived with two or more smokers,
exercised less than once per day, and had a vocational school education. Statistically
nonsignificant decreased risks were observed among workers who were overweight or obese and
who smoked at least 10 pipefuls of tobacco per week (Table
1). Several non-diesel exposures present at very low levels (ie, levels not typically
associated with risk in epidemiological studies) at the study mining facilities were not
statistically significantly related to lung cancer risk in our study (Table 1). Levels of radon underground at the study mines were low (ie,
arithmetic mean <=0.02 Working Levels). The odds ratio for workers in the top quartile of
cumulative radon exposure was 1.32 (95% CI = 0.76 to 2.29), and workers in quartiles
2 or 3 had little or no increased risk (Table 1).
No consistent trend in risk with increasing cumulative radon exposure was apparent
(P
trend = .220). Little or no increased risk was observed for possible
exposure to asbestos, silica, and PAHs from non-diesel sources, which was consistent with
the low measured mean air levels of these potential confounding variables (Table 1) (14).
Workers in the top quartile of cumulative respirable dust exposure had an elevated risk (OR
= 1.31, 95% CI = 0.70 to 2.46), but workers in quartiles 2 or 3 had no
increased risk (Table 1). Factors with
statistically nonsignificant increased or decreased risks had little or no confounding
effect on estimates of risk from diesel exposure (ie, changed point estimates by <=10%)
and were not included in the final models.
Table 2 shows the effect of cigarette smoking
overall and cross-classified by location of employment (ie, surface only and ever
underground). Overall, for both surface-only and ever underground workers combined, the risk
of lung cancer was statistically significantly associated with smoking status (never,
former, current smoker) and smoking intensity (former smoker of >=2 packs per day vs never
smoker: OR = 5.40, 95% CI = 2.23 to 13.06; current smoker of >=2 packs per
day vs never smoker: OR = 12.41, 95% CI = 5.57 to 27.66) (Table 2). We also observed an interaction between
cigarette smoking and location of employment, after adjustment for cumulative REC, lagged 15
years (P
interaction = .082). The lung cancer risks associated with moderate (1 to
<2 packs per day) and heavy smoking (>=2 packs per day) were higher among workers who
only worked at the surface than among those who ever worked underground for both current and
former smokers. For example, the odds ratio for current smokers of one to less than two
packs per day who worked only at the surface was 13.34 (95% CI = 4.50 to 39.53)
compared with an OR of 4.51 (95% CI = 1.50 to 13.58) for those who ever worked
underground (Table 2). Because the effect of
smoking appeared to be diminished among underground workers compared with that among surface
workers, we included the cross classification of location of employment, smoking status, and
smoking intensity in all models used to estimate lung cancer risk by diesel exposure (Tables 1, 3,
and 7; Figure
1), unless noted otherwise. It is also noteworthy that among never smokers,
underground and surface-only workers had similar risks after adjustment for 15-year lagged
cumulative REC (OR = 0.90; 95% CI = 0.26 to 3.09) (Table 2), suggesting that the risk experienced by surface-only workers
was mainly due to smoking. Figure 1Odds ratios (ORs) (solid squares) for lung cancer by expanded categories
of average respirable elemental carbon (REC) intensity and cumulative REC (Supplementary Table 2, available online). A) Average REC
intensity, full range; B) Average REC intensity, less than 128
mg/m3; C) Cumulative REC exposure, full range;
D) Cumulative REC exposure, less than 1280 mg/m3-y. ORs
located at the mean exposure within category. Models for OR by continuous exposure
(d) include a power model, OR(d) =
d
b (solid line); a linear model, OR(d)
= 1 + b d (dashed line for the full range
and dashed-dotted line for the restricted range); and a linear-exponential
model, OR(d) = 1 + b d exp(g
d) (dotted line). Exposure variables were based on a
15-year lag. Confidence intervals were omitted for clarity. The log-linear model was
excluded because it did not fit the data well.Trends in risk with increasing levels of diesel exposure are either statistically
significant or of borderline significance (P
trend <= .08) for all metrics (both unlagged and lagged) (Table 3). The strongest gradient in risk was seen for
15-year lagged cumulative REC (P
trend = .001). The odds ratio for workers in the top quartile of 15-year
lagged cumulative REC exposure (ie, >=536 mg/m3-y) was 2.83 (95% CI =
1.28 to 6.26) compared with workers in the lowest quartile. When the top exposure quartile
was split at the median (ie, 1005 mg/m3-y), the risk continued to rise
(P
trend over all five exposure levels = .002); odds ratios were 2.53 (95% CI
= 1.06 to 6.04) and 3.20 (95% CI = 1.33 to 7.69) for workers in the top
quartile with cumulative REC exposures below and above the median of the quartile,
respectively.We observed a statistically significant gradient in risk with increasing number of years
exposed to diesel exhaust among all workers (P
trend = .043), although an elevated odds ratio occurred only in the
highest duration category. The odds ratio for workers exposed to diesel exhaust for 15 or
more years was 2.09 (95% CI = 0.89 to 4.90) compared with surface workers with
negligible or bystander exposure (Table 3).We also examined risk among all subjects who ever worked underground (Table 4) and among those who worked only at the surface
(Table 5). Among underground workers, we observed
statistically significant trends in risk with increasing average REC intensity, unlagged
(P
trend = .01) and lagged 15 years (P
trend = .001), and with increasing cumulative REC, lagged 15 years
(P
trend = .004) (Table 4). Among
surface workers, in contrast, no consistent positive gradient in risk with increasing diesel
exposure was apparent (Table 5), probably due to
the small number of subjects (53 case subjects and 100 control subjects) and the low levels
of diesel exposure experienced by surface workers. Because of the increased precision gained
by estimating odds ratios based on all subjects, our primary estimates of risk are based on
surface and underground workers combined (Table
3). We stratified the combined results (Table 3) on
whether the subject had self-reported diesel exhaust exposure from a job outside the study
mining facility (eg, ever employed as a long-haul truck driver) (data not shown). No
systematic differences in risk were apparent among subjects with or without occupational
diesel exposure outside the study facility (P
interaction between cumulative REC, lagged 15 years, and outside occupational
diesel exhaust exposure = .222).Use of protective equipment did not appear to modify the observed associations between
diesel exhaust exposure and lung cancer. However, most information on protective equipment
use was obtained from next-of-kin interviews, resulting in a large number of workers with
unknown data (59 case subjects and 129 control subjects). Subjects who reported having used
protective equipment appeared to experience risks similar to the estimates for all workers
combined (Table 3). For example, among workers who
used protective equipment, odds ratios for 15-year lagged cumulative REC exposures of less
than 3 mg/m3-y, 3 to less than 72 mg/m3-y, 72 to less than 536
mg/m3-y, and 536 mg/m3-y or more were 1.0 (referent), 0.31
(95% CI = 0.04 to 2.23; 16 case subjects and 42 control subjects), 1.76 (95% CI
= 0.11 to 27.91; 10 case subjects and 23 control subjects), and 3.66 (95% CI =
0.26 to 52.09; 20 case subjects and 31 control subjects), respectively.
Figure 1 shows category-specific odd ratios (square
symbol), with confidence intervals omitted for clarity, and fitted odds ratios for 15-year
lagged average REC intensity and cumulative REC using various continuous models. To provide
additional points for graphing the exposure-response curve based on categorical data
(Figure 1), we expanded the number of cut points
(cut points for average REC intensity, lagged 15 years: <2, 2 to <4, 4 to <8, 8 to
<16, 16 to <32, 32 to <64, 64 to <128, 128 to <256, and >=256
mg/m3; cut points for cumulative REC, lagged 15 years, were similarly
defined but multiplied by a factor of 10 to account for duration of exposure: <20, 20 to
<40, 40 to <80, 80 to <160, 160 to <320, 320 to <640, 640 to <1280, 1280
to <2560, and >=2560 mg/m3-y; Supplementary Table 2, available online). Odds ratios increased with 15-year
lagged average REC intensity and leveled off above 20-80 mg/m3 (Figure 1, A for the full range and Figure l, B for average REC intensity under 128 mg/m3).
For the full range, the odds ratio pattern was best explained by a one-parameter power model
(deviance = 5.3, P = .022), whereas for the restricted range,
the power and linear models were comparable (deviance = 2.8, P
= .092 and deviance = 3.2, P = .075, respectively). A
similar increasing pattern of odds ratios was observed for cumulative REC exposure, lagged
15 years (Figure 1, C for the full range and Figure l, D for cumulative REC under 1280
mg/m3-y), with a leveling off of risk for exposures above 1,000
mg/m3-y and perhaps a decline in risk among the most heavily exposed
workers. The two-parameter linear-exponential model (dotted line) was the best fitting model
for the full range (relative to the null model, deviance = 12.2, P
= .002) (Figure l, C); for the restricted
range, the best models were the one-parameter linear model (dashed-dotted line) (deviance
= 15.6, P < .001) and the two-parameter linear-exponential model
(dotted line) (deviance = 16.0, P < .001) (Figure 1, D) (Supplementary Table 1, available online). We carried out similar model
comparisons using the unlagged exposure metrics (Supplementary Table 3, available online). However, our evaluation of optimal
lag intervals (Supplementary Figure 1, available online) suggested that the unlagged approach
led to exposure misclassification because recent exposures may not have had sufficient time
to contribute to lung cancer risk and thus resulted in generally poorer fit of the various
models.The combined effect of diesel exposure and intensity of cigarette smoking is shown in Table 6. Among the 14 case subjects and 178 control
subjects who never smoked, odds ratios by tertile of cumulative REC, lagged 15 years, were:
1.0 (referent), OR = 1.47 (95% CI = 0.29 to 7.50), and OR = 7.30 (95%
CI = 1.46 to 36.57). Risk also increased with increasing level of diesel exposure
among smokers of less than one and one to less than two packs per day. In contrast, risk
decreased with increasing levels of diesel exposure among smokers of at least two packs per
day. Similarly, risk associated with smoking intensity was modified by diesel exposure.
Among workers in the lowest tertile of cumulative REC, lagged 15 years, smokers of at least
two packs per day had a risk 27 times that of nonsmokers, whereas among those in the highest
tertile of cumulative REC, heavy smokers had about 2.5-fold the risk of nonsmokers. The
P
interaction between level of diesel exposure and cigarette smoking was .086. We evaluated lung cancer risk by quantitative level of diesel exposure for each type of
mining facility (Table 7). Too few workers were
employed in the one salt and the one limestone mining facility to estimate risk for these
types separately. For workers in both potash and trona mining facilities, risk tended to
increase with increasing levels of average REC intensity and cumulative REC exposure. Trends
were more consistent among potash miners, perhaps reflecting more stability in odds ratios
resulting from twice as many case subjects in the potash as in the trona facilities (Table 7).

DiscussionThis case-control study nested within a cohort of miners showed a strong and
consistent relation between quantitative exposure to diesel exhaust and increased risk of
dying of lung cancer. To our knowledge, this is the first report of a statistically
significant exposure-response relationship for diesel exposure and lung cancer based
on quantitative estimates of historical diesel exposure with adjustment for smoking and
other potential confounders. We observed increasing trends in risk with increasing exposure
to diesel exhaust for both average REC intensity and cumulative REC exposure, unlagged and
lagged 15 years, with the strongest gradient in risk with cumulative REC, lagged 15 years.
We further observed a gradient of increasing risk within the top quartile of 15-year lagged
cumulative REC exposure for workers below and above the median of the quartile. The
associations between diesel exposure and lung cancer were apparent for workers employed in
either the potash or trona facilities (too few workers were employed in the one salt and one
limestone mine to estimate risk separately). The consistency of findings for both potash and
trona facilities is noteworthy because smoking was prohibited in the trona facilities but
not in potash or the other facilities in the study. Reports by next of kin or study subjects
of workers' use of protective equipment within the study mining facilities and
workers' additional occupational exposure to diesel exhaust outside the study
facilities had little or no impact on our findings.These positive findings are consistent with those of the cohort analysis of underground
workers in the same study population (12). However,
estimates of risk for underground workers in the case-control analysis were somewhat
higher than those based on the cohort analysis. For example, the odds ratios by quartile of
the 15-year lagged cumulative REC exposure in the case-control analysis were 1.0,
2.11, 3.48, and 5.90 (for cohort cut points, <108, 108 to <445, 445 to <946, and
>=946 mg/m3-y, respectively), compared with hazard ratios of 1.0, 1.50,
2.17, and 2.21 from the cohort analysis (12). The
lower point estimates from the cohort analysis may be partly due to negative confounding
from cigarette smoking because current smoking was inversely related to diesel exposure in
underground workers (36% and 21% current smokers in lowest vs highest cumulative REC
tertile, respectively). Odds ratios for underground workers in the case-control
analysis using the same cohort cut points dropped to 1.0, 1.94, 2.42, and 3.75,
respectively, when smoking was removed from the model.The continuous models suggest a steep slope at the low end of the exposure-response
curve followed by a leveling, or perhaps even a decline, in risk among the most heavily
exposed workers. A plateauing of exposure-response curves has been reported in studies
of other occupational exposures and cancer risk (19). Possible biological explanations for a plateauing effect include saturation of
metabolic activation and enhanced detoxification or greater DNA repair efficiency at higher
exposure levels. Alternatively, nondifferential misclassification of diesel exposure may be
greater at higher exposures, obscuring further increases in risk.We observed an increased lung cancer risk associated with diesel exposure as was seen among
German potash miners (11), as well as among other
diesel-exposed occupational groups including truck drivers (6,7), railroad workers (8,20),
dockworkers (9), and bus garage workers (10). The German potash miners study (11) found elevated risk with increasing estimated
cumulative total carbon exposure (another surrogate for diesel exposure), although the trend
was not statistically significant. Relative risks were 1.0, 1.13, 2.47, 1.50, and 2.28 for
exposure quintiles (ie, <1.29, 2.04, 2.73, 3.90, >3.90 mg/m3-y,
respectively) (11). Some differences between the
German study (11) and this study are that this
study is considerably larger (US miners: 198 lung cancer deaths out of a total of
278 041 person-years; German miners: 61 lung cancer deaths out of 152 557
person-years), and the US miners had a longer latent period for the development of lung
cancer than the German miners because diesel technology was introduced earlier in the US
study mines (1947-1967) than in the German mines (1969). Finally, in this study, an
intensive effort was undertaken to characterize diesel exposure levels over time by
incorporating changes in size of the diesel equipment, numbers of equipment, and air flow
rates exhausted from the mines based on information collected from the facilities. Our
information indicated that these factors varied considerably over time (14). In the German study, the investigators relied on
reports from local engineers and industrial hygienists that working conditions were constant
over past years. However, in contrast to this study, no past industrial hygiene measurements
were available to confirm this assumption.We observed an attenuation of the effect of cigarette smoking among study subjects who were
exposed to high levels of diesel exhaust as estimated by REC (Table 6). This finding mirrors a recent observation from a study in
Xuanwei, China (21), where lung cancer rates are
high because of unvented indoor burning of coal for heating and cooking in homes (22). The effect of tobacco on lung cancer risk in that
study was weak in the presence of heavy indoor exposures from smoky coal but became stronger
with installation of venting, which greatly diminished smoky coal air concentrations (21,22). Little
is known about the effect of the interaction between cigarette smoking and diesel exhaust
exposure on lung cancer risk. If our observation of attenuation of the smoking effect in the
presence of high levels of diesel exhaust is confirmed, several possible mechanistic
explanations are apparent. First, at high levels of diesel exhaust exposure, PAHs,
nitro-PAHs, and related compounds could compete with the metabolic activation of PAHs in
tobacco smoke, leading to enzyme saturation. For example, PAHs in complex mixtures have been
shown to have less than additive genotoxic effects at higher exposure levels (23). Second, constituents of diesel exhaust may
suppress enzymes that activate or induce enzymes that detoxify carcinogens in tobacco smoke.
For example, diesel exhaust particles have been shown to reduce activity of CYP2B1, which
plays a role in the activation of certain tobacco-specific nitrosamines (24). Also, diesel particulate matter has been shown to
reduce the initiation of skin tumors in Sencar mice treated with the potent PAH
dibenzo[a,l]pyrene, possibly through inhibition of enzymes that carry out its metabolic
activation (25).We also observed a weakening of the diesel exhaust effect among heavy smokers (ie, smokers
of at least two packs per day), which is necessarily implied by the observation of a
weakening of the effect of smoking at least two packs per day among workers heavily exposed
to diesel exhaust. It has previously been reported that coal dust burden in the lungs of
coal miners is reduced among smokers, which may be attributable to increased coal dust
clearance (26), and it is possible that diesel
exhaust particulate deposition may be reduced in the lungs of smokers by a similar process.
Although little experimental evidence is available to date to support and explain effect
modification of diesel exposure by smoking, it is theoretically possible by one or more of
the mechanisms described above.If the observed interaction between smoking and diesel exhaust represents a real effect,
then the generalizability of our estimates of risk for diesel exposure to other populations
depends not only on the level of exposure to diesel exhaust but also on the distribution of
smoking status and intensity in the population. For example, estimates of lung cancer risk
in a population of never smokers with diesel exposures similar to those of the miners in
this study would be 1.0, 1.47, and 7.30 for individuals with cumulative REC, lagged 15
years, of less than 8 mg/m3-y, 8 to less than 304 mg/m3-y, and
304 mg/m3-y or more, respectively. In contrast, the overall study population,
which included 29% never smokers, had lower odds ratios of 1.0, 1.12, and 2.40 for the same
tertiles of cumulative REC exposure, lagged 15 years, respectively (data not shown). In
fact, the proportion of never smokers in this study population is substantially lower than
the 51% reported for the US population of men aged 18 years or older (27), suggesting that diesel-related estimates of lung cancer risk in
the US population may be higher than the overall risk estimates reported here because the
proportion of never smokers in the US population is higher than in this study cohort.Our study has several major strengths including its relatively large size, which provided
adequate statistical power to detect a statistically significant exposure-response
relationship, adequate latent period for the development of lung cancer, detailed exposure
assessment that enabled us to evaluate risk based on quantitative historical exposure to
REC, subjects with a wide range of diesel exposure and with underground workers experiencing
exposure levels considerably higher than that of other occupationally exposed groups in
previous studies, a high interview participation rate for both case subjects and control
subjects, and the ability to control for confounding from smoking and other lung cancer risk
factors. Two main limitations are also apparent. First, the data on smoking and other
potential confounders were derived mainly from next-of-kin interviews. Although a comparison
of confounder data derived directly from living and from next of kin for deceased control
subjects revealed comparability of responses, we cannot completely rule out the possibility
of residual confounding. Second, as in most epidemiological studies of cancer that rely on
retrospective exposure assessment, estimates of diesel exposure in this study undoubtedly
had some imprecision despite considerable effort to minimize misclassification. This
imprecision is likely to result in nondifferential misclassification of exposure, which
would tend to bias the estimates of risk toward the null (28). Thus, the true estimates of lung cancer risk associated with diesel exhaust
may, in fact, be higher than those reported here.In sum, our results provide further evidence supporting a causal effect of diesel exhaust
exposure on lung cancer mortality in humans. We observed a statistically significant
exposure-response relationship after we adjusted for possible confounding from smoking
and other established and hypothesized lung cancer risk factors. The exposure-response
curve showed a steep increase in risk with increasing exposure at low-to-moderate levels
followed by a plateauing or perhaps a decline in risk among heavily exposed subjects.Our findings are important not only for miners but also for the 1.4 million American
workers and the 3 million European workers exposed to diesel exhaust (29), and for urban populations worldwide. Some of the higher average
elemental carbon levels reported in cities include Los Angeles (4.0 mg/m3)
(30), the Bronx (a borough in New York City) (6.6
mg/m3) (31), nine urban sites in
China (8.3 mg/m3) (32), Mexico City
(5.8 mg/m3) (33), and Estarreja,
Portugal (11.8 mg/m3) (34).
Environmental exposure to average elemental carbon levels in the 2-6 mg/m3
range over a lifetime as would be experienced in highly polluted cities approximates
cumulative exposures experienced by underground miners with low exposures in our study.
Because such workers had at least a 50% increased lung cancer risk, our results suggest that
the high air concentrations of elemental carbon reported in some urban areas may confer
increased risk of lung cancer. Thus, if the diesel exhaust/lung cancer relation is causal,
the public health burden of the carcinogenicity of inhaled diesel exhaust in workers and in
populations of urban areas with high levels of diesel exposure may be substantial.

FundingThe research was funded by the Intramural Research Program of the National
Institutes of Health, National Cancer Institute, Division of Cancer Epidemiology and
Genetics and the National Institute for Occupational Safety
and Health, Division of Respiratory Disease Studies.

Supplementary Material
Supplementary Data
