[Abstract, Introduction, Methods, Results, Discussion, Discussion, Mixed]

Novel peptide-dendrimer conjugates as drug carriers for
                    targeting nonsmall cell lung cancer. Phage display technology has been demonstrated to be a powerful tool for                     screening useful ligands that are capable of specifically binding to biomarkers                     on the surface of tumor cells. The ligands found by this technique, such as                     peptides, have been successfully applied in the fields of early cancer                     diagnostics and chemotherapy. In this study, a novel nonsmall cell lung                     cancer-targeting peptide (LCTP, sequence RCPLSHSLICY) was screened in vivo using                     a Ph.D.-C7C(tm) phage display library. In order to develop a                     universal tumor-targeting drug carrier, the LCTP and fluorescence-labeled                     molecule (FITC) were conjugated to an acetylated polyamidoamine (PAMAM)                     dendrimer of generation 4 (G4) to form a                     PAMAM-Ac-FITC-LCTP conjugate. The                     performance of the conjugate was first tested in vitro. In vitro results of cell                     experiments analyzed by flow cytometry and inverted fluorescence microscopy                     indicated that PAMAM-Ac-FITC-LCTP was                     enriched more in NCI-H460 cells than in 293T cells, and cellular uptake was both                     time- and dose-dependent. The tissue distribution of the conjugate in athymic                     mice with lung cancer xenografts was also investigated to test the targeting                     efficiency of PAMAM-Ac-FITC-LCTP in vivo.                     The results showed that LCTP can effectively facilitate the targeting of                     PAMAM-Ac-FITC-LCTP to nonsmall cell lung                     cancer cells and tumors. These results suggest that the LCTP-conjugated PAMAM                     dendrimer might be a promising drug carrier for targeted cancer diagnosis and                     treatment.

Introduction
Nonspecific anticancer chemotherapy has no tumor targeting effect and will kill
                normal and cancer cells, causing severe side effects in many patients. To solve this
                problem, targeted drug delivery systems have received great attention.1 In this system, drugs can be
                specifically targeted to the tumors, increase drug solubility,2,3
                prolong time of drugs in the circulation, protect drugs from degradation, and
                improve their metabolic kinetics.4,5 To date,
                    liposomes,6 micelles,7,8 and dendrimers9 conjugated with specific ligands have been
                identified as being able to target drugs to cancer cells.
Polyamidoamine (PAMAM) dendrimers have attracted considerable research interest as
                drug carriers due to their unique properties, ie, hyperbranched and monodispersed
                tree-like structures with multifunctional surfaces, enabling the dendrimers to
                encapsulate or conjugate drug molecules. Moreover, the terminal groups of PAMAM can
                be easily modified (by, eg, acetylation or poly(ethyleneglycol) modification
                [PEGylation]) to improve their solubility and
                biocompatibility. In order to improve the targeting capability of PAMAM, many
                targeting molecules, such as antibodies,10 folic acid,11,12 biotin,13 peptides,14-17 and
                    carbohydrates18,19 have been connected to PAMAM
                dendrimers. Finally, chemotherapy drugs have been covalently bound to these
                    dendrimers20,21 or encapsulated in the internal
                cavities of dendritic molecules11,22 to generate
                targeted drug delivery systems.
A key factor of a targeted drug delivery system is the finding of targeting molecules
                that can specifically recognize tumor and cancer cells. Phage display technology is
                a powerful approach to screening targeting molecules, such as peptides, for cancer
                cells or tumor blood vessel endothelial cells.23,24 Many novel angiogenic vessels and homing peptides have been isolated
                recently using this method.17,25,26 Furthermore, in vivo phage display can screen
                cancer-binding peptides regardless of whether the receptor is known or not.
                Therefore, this technique can quickly screen cancer-specific peptides.27,28 In addition to drug delivery systems,
                tumor-targeting peptides are also employed in diagnosis or radiotherapy by
                delivering radionuclide.29-31 Some
                peptides discovered by phage display are even able to inhibit cancer growth and
                induce cancer cell apoptosis.32,33
In order to develop a universal drug carrier for nonsmall cell lung cancer
                chemotherapy, a Ph.D.-C7C(tm) (New England Biolabs, Beverly, MA)
                phage display library was utilized to screen peptides specific for nonsmall cell
                lung cancer. It has become generally accepted that organs have their own special
                markers. Such heterogeneity was reported after it became apparent that endothelial
                cells in different organs display organ-specific markers. The phage display library
                includes all possible peptide sequences, and some random peptides displayed by phage
                can bind specifically with tumor-specific markers displayed by nonsmall cell lung
                cancer, based on protein-protein interactions. The phage displaying
                specific peptides would home to the tumor site, after intravenous injection. The
                tumor is then harvested and the phage therein collected and amplified. After four to
                five rounds, the phage including the tumor-specific targeting peptide can be
                isolated and the inserted peptide sequence translated by the phage DNA sequence. In
                our study, a novel peptide, lung cancer-targeting peptide (LCTP; RCPLSHSLICY), was
                discovered which can specifically target nonsmall cell lung cancer. The LCTP was
                then conjugated with fluoresceinisothiocyanate (FITC, a fluorescence labeling agent
                used as a tracer) and acetylated PAMAM to generate a targeted drug delivery carrier
                (PAMAM-Ac-FITC-LCTP). The performance of this
                drug carrier was evaluated by in vitro culturing NCIH460 and 293T cells and in vivo
                using athymic mice with lung cancer xenografts. Our results showed that the modified
                PAMAM peptide dendrimer could be easily taken up by NCI-H460 cells in vitro and by
                tumors in vivo.

Materials and methods
Materials
Phenyl methyl sulphonyl fiuoride (PMSF), isopropyl
                    b-D-1-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG), aprotinin, leupeptin,
                    5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl-b-D-galactopyranoside (X-gal), FITC,
                    5,5-dithiobis-2-nitrobenzoic acid (DTNB), and polyamidoamine (G 4) were
                    purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St Louis, MO). Dialysis membrane (MWCO, 3500) was
                    purchased from BBI Inc (Shanghai, China).
                    3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyl tetrazolium bromide (MTT), all cell
                    culture media, and supplies were purchased from Gibco Corporation (Grand Island,
                    NE).
The NCI-H460 cell line was kindly provided by Dr Yong Wang (Institute of
                    Radiation Medicine, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Tianjin, China). The
                    293T cell line was purchased from Keygen Co (Nanjing, China). Phage DNA
                    sequencing was performed by Shanghai Sangon Corp (Shanghai, China). Peptides
                    were synthesized by GL Biochem Ltd (Shanghai, China). BALB/c-nu/nu athymic mice
                    (female, 4-6 weeks old) were purchased from the Laboratory Animal
                    Center of The Academy of Military Medical Sciences (Beijing, China). The animal
                    studies were performed in accordance with the Regulations for the Administration
                    of Affairs Concerning Experimental Animals (Tianjin, revised in June 2004) and
                    adhered to the Guiding Principles in the Care and Use of Animals of the American
                    Physiological Society. The Ph.D.-C7C(tm) phage display
                    peptide library kit was used to screen specific peptides binding to human lung
                    cancer xenografts on BALB/c-nu/nu athymic mice.
The phage display library kit is based on a combinatorial library of random
                    peptide 7-mers fused to the N terminus of the minor coat protein (cpIII) of M13
                    phage. The random sequence is flanked by a pair of cysteine residues. Under
                    nonreducing conditions, the cysteines spontaneously form a disulfide crosslink,
                    resulting in phage display of cyclized peptides. The titer of the library is 2
                    x 1013 plaque-forming units (pfu). The library consists
                    of 1.2 x 109 electroporated sequences (compared with
                        207 = 1.28
                    x 109 possible seven-residue sequences). Extensively
                    sequencing the naive library has revealed a wide diversity of sequences with no
                    obvious positional biases. The Escherichia coli host strain
                    ER2738 (Arobust F+ strain with a rapid growth rate; New England
                    Biolabs) was used for M13 phage propagation.
In vivo phage display screening and peptide synthesis
BALB/c-nu/nu athymic mice (female, 4-6 weeks) were used, and 2
                    x 107 NCI-H460 cells in 0.2 mL of Roswell Park Memorial
                    Institute 1640 (RPMI-1640) medium were subcutaneously injected in the right
                    flank to produce lung cancer xenografts. A Ph.D.-C7C phage display peptide
                    library, which contained 2 x 1011 pfu was mixed with 200
                    mL of Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium
                    (DMEM), and injected into the mice through the tail vein when the tumor grew up
                    to about 0.5 cm in diameter. After circulation for 5 minutes, the mice were
                    sacrificed, and perfused by injection of 50 mL phosphate-buffered saline through
                    the heart to wash the unbounded phage. Then the tumors were harvested, weighed,
                    and ground in 1 mL of DMEM-PI (DMEM containing the protease inhibitors PMSF
                    [1 mM], aprotinin [20
                    mg/mL], and leupeptin [1
                    mg/mL]). The tissue was washed five times with ice-cold
                    DMEM-PI containing 1% bovine serum albumin. After centrifugation,
                    the phage particles were amplified by ER2738 bacteria overnight at
                    37degC. The phages were titered on agar plates in the presence of
                    IPTG/X-gel (1 mg/L) and tetracycline (40 mg/mL). The amplified phage
                    was injected into the mice to repeat the above procedures. This screening was
                    repeated for five rounds.17,27,34 At the end of the fifth round,
                    the phage was eluted and titered on LB/IPTG/X-gel plates. The phage clones were
                    randomly selected, and the inserted DNA sequence was determined using primer
                    5'-CCCTCATAGTTAGCGTAACG-3' (New England Biolabs). The
                    phage-displayed peptides were translated and synthesized according the DNA
                    sequences.
Synthesis of acetylated PAMAM dendrimer
The acetylated PAMAM dendrimer (PAMAM-Ac) was synthesized according
                    to the method described in the literature.13,16,35 Briefly,
                    1.012 g (MW 14215, 71.2 mmol) of PAMAM dendrimer in 120 mL anhydrous
                    methanol (MeOH) was reacted with 0.214 g (2.110 mmol) of acetic anhydride
                    overnight at room temperature with stirring in the presence of 0.352 g (3.454
                    mmol) of triethylamine. After evaporation, the product was dialyzed for 3 days
                    against phosphate-buffered saline and double-distilled water using the dialysis
                    membrane (MWCO = 3500 Da), then lyophilized, and 1.165 g of
                    PAMAM-Ac was obtained. The average number of acetyl groups grafted
                    to each PAMAM molecule was determined by 1H nuclear magnetic
                    resonance calibration.
Conjugation of FITC to acetylated PAMAM dendrimer
FITC (38.2 mg, 98.1 mmol) was added dropwise into 40 mL of dimethyl
                    sulfoxide (DMSO) solution containing 0.401 g (MW 15433, 25.9 mmol)
                    of PAMAM-Ac. The reaction mixture was allowed to stir overnight. The
                    product was dialyzed against phosphate-buffered saline and double-distilled
                    water using dialysis membrane (MWCO = 3500 Da) for 3 days in a dark
                    room, and the adsorbance at 500 nm of the eluent was detected to ensure that all
                    free FITC was removed. The product was then lyophilized in a dark room, and
                    0.387 g of PAMAM-Ac-FITC was obtained. The average
                    number of FITC molecules conjugated to each PAMAM molecule was determined by
                        1H nuclear magnetic resonance calibration and ultraviolet-visible
                    adsorbance (Varian Cary 100 bio ultraviolet-visible spectrophotometer).
Conjugation of peptides to FITC-labeled dendrimer
The solution containing 9.1 mg (90.9 mmol) of succinic anhydride in 6
                    mL of anhydrous MeOH was added dropwise into a solution of 0.103 g (MW 16601,
                    6.2 mmol) of PAMAM-Ac-FITC and 24.5 mg of
                    (0.242 mmol) triethanolamine (TEA) in 90 mL of anhydrous MeOH with stirring.
                    After overnight reaction at room temperature, the solvent was evaporated, and
                    then the crude product was dialyzed (MWCO = 3500 Da) and lyophilized
                    using the aforementioned method; 12.8 mg (MW 18001, 0.71 mmol) of
                    the above product was then reacted with 2.0 mg (10.4 mmol) of
                    1-[3-(dimethylamino)-propyl]-3-ethyl-carbodimide HCl
                    (EDC) in 4 mL of water for 3 hours. Then 9.2 mg (7.1 mmol) of the
                    LCTP in 1 mL of DMSO was added dropwise to the above solution and stirred
                    overnight. The crude product was dialyzed (MWCO = 3500 Da) using the
                    aforementioned method, and the adsorbance at 275 nm of the elute was detected to
                    ensure that all free peptide was removed. Then the product was lyophilized in a
                    dark room. The average number of peptides conjugated to the dendrimer was
                    determined using the Ellman assay.36 A standard curve was plotted with free LCTP. During the process, an
                    excess of sodium sulfite was added to the peptide solution at pH 9.0 to cleave
                    the disulfide bond, and the reaction was carried out in a dark room. The
                    adsorbance at 412 nm was used to calculate the number of peptides conjugated to
                    the dendrimer according to the standard curve.
Laser light-scattering assay
Samples of PAMAM-Ac, PAMAM-Ac-FITC, and
                    PAMAM-Ac-FITC-LCTP were filtered (pore size,
                    0.45 mm) and analyzed with a light-scattering spectrometer (BI-200SM; Brookhaven
                    Instruments, Holtsville, NY), equipped with a digital correlator (BI-9000AT;
                    Brookhaven Instruments) to determine the granulometric distribution of the
                    conjugates at 532 nm.
Cell culture
NCI-H460 cells were cultured in RPMI-1640 medium and 293T cells in DMEM medium.
                    The medium was supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum,
                    1% penicillin, and 100 mg/mL streptomycin. Cells were
                    grown at 37degC in 5% CO2.
Cytotoxicity assay
The cytotoxicity of the PAMAM, PAMAM-Ac,
                    PAMAM-Ac-FITC, and
                    PAMAM-Ac-FITC-LCTP were evaluated by the MTT
                    assay. The 293T cells were seeded into 96-well plates at a density of
                    104 cells/well and incubated for 24 hours. The filtrate of the
                    samples (0.22 mm) was added to the cells at different concentrations
                    (0, 0.125, 0.25, 0.5, 1.0, 2.0, and 4.0 mM). After incubation for
                    another 24 hours, 25 mL of MTT solution (5 mg/mL in
                    phosphate-buffered saline) was added to each well. Four hours later, the medium
                    containing MTT was removed, and the samples in the wells were air dried. Acidic
                    isopropanol (100 mL, 0.04 M HCl in absolute isopropanol) was added
                    to dissolve the formazen crystals. The optical density of the solution was
                    measured at 570 nm using a microplate reader (Labsystem; Multiskan, Ascent,
                    Finland).
In vitro cellular uptake assay
293T and NCI-H460 cells were seeded in 24-well plates at a density of
                    104 cells/well. After 24 hours, the cells were incubated with
                    PAMAM-Ac-FITC or
                    PAMAM-Ac-FITC-LCTP at different
                    concentrations ranging from 0.05 to 1.0 mM for 4 hours, or incubated
                    with 0.25 mM of
                    PAMAM-Ac-FITC-LCTP at different intervals
                    ranging from 0.5 to 8.0 hours. To compare the uptake efficiency between 293T
                    cells and NCI-H460 cells, the two cell lines were incubated with 0.5
                    mM of the conjugates for 4 hours. To examine the competitive uptake,
                    293T cells and NCI-H460 cells were preincubated with 20 mM free LCTP
                    for 1 hour before the conjugates were added. At the end of incubation, the cells
                    were trypsinized, washed with physiologic saline three times, and we then
                    proceeded to fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) analysis (Altra FCM;
                    Beckman Coulter, Miami, FL). The uptake efficiency was expressed as the
                    percentage of FITC-positive cells. The cells were also viewed under a confocal
                    microscope (DMI6000B; Leica, Wetzlar, Germany) and an inverted fluorescence
                    microscope. Images were recorded using CCD (ECLIPSE TE2000-U; Nikon, Tokyo,
                    Japan).
In vivo targeting assay
BALB/c-nu/nu athymic mice with lung cancer xenografts were prepared as described
                    earlier. Mice were used for experiment when the diameter of tumor xenografts
                    reached 0.4-0.6 cm. The animals were randomly divided into two
                    groups. A 0.3 mL solution of PAMAM-Ac-FITC or
                    PAMAM-Ac-FITC-LCTP (10 mM in
                    phosphate-buffered saline) was injected through the tail vein of the animal.
                    Four hours later, the tumors and main organs (heart, liver, lung, spleen,
                    kidney, thyroid, brain, and ovary) were harvested and proceeded to imaging
                    (KODAK IS in vivo FX; Kodak, New Haven, CT). The relative fluorescence intensity
                    per unit area was calculated using KODAK 5.1 software (KODAK IS in vivo FX).
Statistical analysis
The unpaired Student's t-test was used to evaluate
                    the significance between experimental groups. A value of P
                    < 0.05 was considered to be statistically significant.

Results
Screening and peptide synthesis
After five rounds of screening, 40 random phage clones were amplified and the DNA
                    sequences were determined. The phage displayed peptide sequences were translated
                    (see Table 1). The most
                    frequent peptide sequence was ACPLSHSLIC, and the binding sequence with nonsmall
                    cell lung cancer was the sequence between the two cysteine residues. In order to
                    connect the peptide to the PAMAM dendrimer, the alanine residue was replaced by
                    arginine. For 125I-labeling, a tyrosine residue was added to the end
                    of the peptide. The final peptide sequence synthesized was RCPLSHSLICY, which
                    was cyclized with two cysteine residues, marked LCTP (see supporting information
                    for the HPLC and MS spectra of the synthesized peptide).
Preparation of PAMAM-Ac-FITC-LCTP
                    conjugate
The synthetic route of PAMAM-Ac-FITC-LCTP
                    conjugate is shown in Figure 1.
                    The degree of PAMAM-Ac acetylation was measured by 1H
                    nuclear magnetic resonance (300 mHz, D2O); the aliphatic peaks appear
                    at 1.80 ppm, 2.24 ppm, 2.46 ppm, 2.64 ppm, 2.93 ppm, 3.12 ppm, 3.23 ppm, and
                    3.30 ppm. The integration ratio of methylene protons signal of
                        -CH2C(O)- at d2.24 ppm (248
                    H) and methyl protons signal of -C(O)CH3 at
                    d1.80 ppm was 2.84, indicating that about 29 acetyl groups were
                    grafted to each PAMAM molecule (PAMAM-Ac29). Conjugation
                    of FITC to PAMAM-Ac was characterized by 1H nuclear
                    magnetic resonance (300 mHz, D2O) and ultraviolet-visible
                    spectrum. The aliphatic peaks appear at 1.80 ppm, 2.23 ppm, 2.44 ppm, 2.63 ppm,
                    2.94 ppm, 3.11 ppm, 3.29 ppm, and 3.30 ppm. The aromatic peaks at 6.37 ppm, 6.96
                    ppm, 7.42 ppm, and 7.67 ppm corresponded to the protons in FITC. FITC has a
                    characteristic absorbance peak at around 500 nm and not for PAMAM-Ac
                    and the peptide (Figure 2). The
                    number of FITC conjugated to PAMAM-Ac was about 3-4,
                    which was determined based on the standard calibration curve of free FITC. The
                    number of LCTP grafted to PAMAM-Ac-FITC was
                    7-8 by Ellman assay (see supporting information for the 1H nuclear
                    magnetic resonance spectra of PAMAM-Ac,
                    PAMAM-Ac-FITC, and
                    PAMAM-Ac-FITC-LCTP).
Cytotoxicity assay
As shown in Figure 3, when the
                    concentration of the polymers was higher than 2 mM, the cytotoxicity
                    of PAMAM-Ac, PAMAM-Ac-FITC, and
                    PAMAM-Ac-FITC-LCTP was lower than that of
                    unmodified PAMAM. The cells viability was over 88%, which suggests
                    that the PAMAM-Ac-FITC-LCTP conjugate has
                    good biocompatibility.
In vitro cellular uptake assay
Figure 4A shows the uptake
                    efficiencies of the two conjugates for 293T cells over 4 hours. The uptake
                    efficiencies of both conjugates were nearly of equal value and were
                    concentration-dependent. However, although the uptake efficiencies of the two
                    conjugates by NCI-H460 cells were also concentration-dependent, but the uptake
                    efficiency of the PAMAM-Ac-FITC-LCTP was
                    much higher than that of PAMAM-Ac-FITC (Figure 4B). The cellular uptake of
                    the conjugates by both cell lines was time-dependent, but reached saturation
                    after incubation for 4 hours (Figure
                    4C). Under the same conditions, the uptake of
                    PAMAM-Ac-FITC-LCTP by NCI-H460 cells was
                    threefold higher than that of PAMAM-Ac-FITC, and more
                    than threefold higher than the uptake of the two conjugates by 293T cells. When
                    preincubated with free LCTP, uptake of
                    PAMAM-Ac-FITC-LCTP by NCI-H460 cells was
                    effectively decreased, but for 293T cells and
                    PAMAM-Ac-FITC there was almost no change (Figure 4D).
The uptake of PAMAM-Ac-FITC and
                    PAMAM-Ac-FITC-LCTP by the cells was directly
                    visualized under the inverted fluorescence microscope. As shown in Figure 5, the fluorescence signal
                    of the PAMAM-Ac-FITC-LCTP-treated NCI-H460
                    cells (Figure 5D) was much
                    stronger than those from the two conjugates-treated 293T cells and the
                    PAMAM-Ac-FITC-treated NCI-H460 cells. A clear image was
                    observed under confocal microscopy. Figure 5E shows the image of
                    PAMAM-Ac-FITC-LCTP-treated NCI-H460
                cells.
In vivo targeting assay
The distribution of PAMAM-Ac-FITC and
                    PAMAM-Ac-FITC-LCTP in different organs was
                    evaluated by measuring the fluorescence intensity of each organ at 4 hours after
                    intravenous injection. Figure 6
                    showed the fluorescence density of the main organs. The highest density of the
                    two conjugates was found in the kidney next in the tumors, followed by the brain
                    and the lung. There was no difference in the distribution of the two conjugates
                    among all the other organs, except in the tumors where the distribution of
                    PAMAM-Ac-FITC-LCTP was significantly higher
                    than that of PAMAM-Ac-FITC (P <
                    0.01).

Discussion
In vivo phage display has been proven to be a useful method in isolating organ- or
                tumor-specific binding probes. The random sequence oligonucleotides were inserted
                into a specific site of phage DNA, then random sequence peptides or proteins were
                expressed and exposed on the phage surface. Because organs and tumors carry unique
                marker molecules,27,37 phage display can be used to
                screen organ- or tumor-specific peptide sequences for targeted drug delivery. The
                present study used an in vivo phage display method to screen peptides. Cyclic
                peptides have higher stability and binding capability,38 so the Ph.D.-C7C phage display peptide library kit
                was used, in which the inserted peptide were cyclized by two cysteine residues. As
                shown in the Table, the phage inserted ACPLSHSLIC sequence was amplified and
                enriched. Among the total of 37 phage displayed peptide sequences, 28 were the same,
                which was the ACPLSHSLIC peptide.
The cationic PAMAM has hemolytic toxicity.39 Several methods to decrease the hemolytic toxicity of PAMAM have been
                reported, one of which is the PEG modification.40-42 PEGylation can inhibit the nonspecific
                interactions between PAMAM and biomolecules and improve the biocompatibility of
                PAMAM, and can also decrease the immunogenicity and antigenicity of PAMAM. Another
                method is acetylation, which can decrease the positive charge density of PAMAM. In
                our studies, partially acetylated PAMAM displayed higher cell viability than PAMAM
                by the MTT assay. Further conjugation of FITC and the LCTP to the
                PAMAM-Ac had no influence on the biocompatibility of the dendrimer
                    (Figure 3).
The uptake of PAMAM-Ac-FITC-LCTP by both 293T and
                NCI-H460 cells was found to be time- and dose-dependent. However, the uptake
                efficiency of PAMAM-Ac-FITC-LCTP by NCI-H460
                cells was much higher than that of PAMAM-Ac-FITC. In
                contrast, the uptake of both conjugates by 293T cells was very low. Similar results
                were previously reported by Hill et al16 and Shukla et al.43 In
                their studies, RGD peptide drove PAMAM conjugates specifically to MDPC-23 and HUVEC
                cancer cells, and enhanced cellular uptake. The free LCTP could greatly decrease
                NCI-H460 cell uptake of PAMAM-Ac-FITC-LCTP, but
                had no effect on NCI-H460 cell uptake of PAMAM-Ac-FITC and
                293T cell uptake of PAMAM-Ac-FITC-LCTP and
                PAMAM-Ac-FITC. These observations suggest that LCTP played
                an important role in driving the conjugates highly and selectively to bind the
                membrane of NCI-H460 cells, thus facilitating the endocytosis process.
Because the penetration of FITC fluorescence through the body of mice is weak, in
                vivo imaging of live athymic mice bearing nonsmall cell lung cancer tumors cannot
                provide an exact fluorescence intensity. In this study, the tumors and organs were
                harvested and imaged ex vivo. The distribution of
                PAMAM-Ac-FITC and
                PAMAM-Ac-FITC-LCTP conjugates in each organ was
                almost the same except that the tumors had significantly higher uptake of
                PAMAM-Ac-FITC-LCTP than
                PAMAM-Ac-FITC (P < 0.01). This
                result suggests that the targeting effect of LCTP might enhance the permeability of
                PAMAM-Ac-FITC-LCTP in nonsmall cell lung cancer
                tumor. Indeed, the difference of tumor uptake for the two conjugates was not
                remarkable, and more experiments need to be done to improve the targeting effect of
                the conjugate. The distribution of the conjugates among different organs was found
                in the following order: kidney > tumor >= brain > lung
                > thyroid >= ovary> liver >= spleen
                >= heart (Figure 6). The
                highest distribution of the conjugates was found in the kidney 4 hours after
                injection which is probably due to the fact that kidney is the main organ that
                excretes waste out of the body. And four hours after the injection, part of the
                conjugates had moved to the metabolic system, which is a phenomenon often observed
                in drug pharmacokinetic studies.15,25 It was
                interesting that the distribution of the conjugate in the brain was similar to that
                in the tumors, indicating that this PAMAM conjugate can penetrate the
                blood-brain barrier and enter the brain.44,45
Although antibody, folic acid, and biotin are often used as targeting agents, the
                peptides screened here by an in vivo phage display method could target the unique
                receptors expressed by cancer cells, thus remarkably improved the targeting
                capability for chemotherapy.

Conclusion
In summary, NCI-H460 cell-specific LCTP was screened by the phage display method and
                conjugated to the acetylated PAMAM dendrimer. The specific LCTP-modified PAMAM
                dendrimer could be easily taken up by NCI-H460 cells in vitro and by tumors in vivo.
                These results indicate that the LCTP-dendrimer conjugate might be a
                useful drug carrier for cancer clinical diagnosis and treatment.

Supplementary Material
Figure S11H nuclear magnetic resonance spectrum (300 mHz,
                                D2O) of the acetylated polyamidoamine.
Figure S21H nuclear magnetic resonance spectrum (300 mHz,
                                D2O) of the fluorescence-labeled acetylated
                                polyamidoamine.
Figure S31H nuclear magnetic resonance spectrum (300 mHz,
                                D2O) of the fluorescence-labeled acetylated
                                polyamidoamine lung cancer targeting peptide.
Figure S4Laser light-scattering assay results. The polyamidoamine particle
                                size was about 7 nm (A) and the particle size of
                                acetylated polyamidoamine (B) fluorescence-labeled
                                acetylated polyamidoamine (C), and fluorescence-labeled
                                acetylated polyamidoamine lung cancer targeting peptide
                                (D) becomes bigger and bigger.
