[Abstract, Introduction, Methods, Results, Discussion]

Histoplasmosis mimicking primary lung cancer or pulmonary
metastases *,**. OBJECTIVE:  To describe the main clinical and radiological characteristics of patients with histoplasmosis mimicking lung cancer.    METHODS:  This was a retrospective descriptive study based on the analysis of the medical records of the 294 patients diagnosed with histoplasmosis between 1977 and 2011 at the Mycology Laboratory of the Santa Casa Sisters of Mercy Hospital of Porto Alegre in the city of Porto Alegre, Brazil. The diagnosis of histoplasmosis was established by culture, histopathological examination, or immunodiffusion testing (identification of M or H precipitation bands). After identifying the patients with macroscopic lesions, as well as radiological and CT findings consistent with malignancy, we divided the patients into two groups: those with a history of cancer and presenting with lesions mimicking metastases (HC group); and those with no such history but also presenting with lesions mimicking metastases (NHC group).    RESULTS:  Of the 294 patients diagnosed with histoplasmosis, 15 had presented with lesions mimicking primary neoplasia or metastases (9 and 6 in the HC and NHC groups, respectively). The age of the patients ranged from 13 to 67 years (median, 44 years). Of the 15 patients, 14 (93%) presented with pulmonary lesions at the time of hospitalization.    CONCLUSIONS:  The clinical and radiological syndrome of neoplastic disease is not confined to malignancy, and granulomatous infectious diseases must therefore be considered in the differential diagnosis.

Introduction
Infection with the thermally dimorphic fungus Histoplasma capsulatum
var. capsulatum (H. capsulatum) can produce a broad
spectrum of clinical manifestations, ranging from self-limiting respiratory complaints
to progressive, life-threatening infections. Primary pulmonary infection results from
the inhalation of airborne microconidia, and the vast majority of infections are
self-limiting-in most cases, the infection is limited to the lungs-however, since the
onset of the AIDS epidemic, disseminated histoplasmosis has been reported with greater
frequency.(
1
,
2
)
Air currents can carry the microconidia for miles, exposing unsuspecting individuals to
indirect contact with a contaminated site. In addition, the fungus can be present at
environmental sites that are not visibly contaminated with droppings from birds or bats,
thus reducing the chance that histoplasmosis will be suspected.(
3
) In Brazil,
histoplasmosis is a recurrent topic in pulmonology.(
4
-
8
) A review of the
literature revealed that there have been cases of histoplasmosis mimicking
malignancy.(
9
-
11
) The rarity of this manifestation prompted our study, the
objective of which was to describe the main clinical and radiological characteristics of
patients with histoplasmosis mimicking cancer. We also review the literature on the
topic.

Methods
This was a retrospective descriptive study based on the analysis of the medical records
of the 294 patients diagnosed with histoplasmosis between 1977 and 2011 at the Mycology
Laboratory of the Santa Casa Sisters of Mercy Hospital of Porto Alegre in the city of
Porto Alegre, Brazil. The study was approved by the Human Research Ethics Committee of
the Hospital (Protocol no. 306/11). The diagnosis of histoplasmosis was established by
culture, histopathological examination, or immunodiffusion testing (identification of M
or H precipitation bands).(
6
)
After identifying the patients with macroscopic lesions, as well as with radiological
and CT findings consistent with malignancy, we divided the patients into two groups:
patients with a history of cancer presenting lesions mimicking metastases (HC group);
and patients without a history of cancer presenting at least one lesion mimicking
primary cancer (NHC group). The radiological criteria for inclusion in the groups were
the following: having multiple lesions; having a higher prevalence of pulmonary lesions
in the lower lobes (HC group); or having a solid solitary lesion with homogenous
soft-tissue attenuation and without benign calcification or spiculated margins.

Results
Of the 294 patients diagnosed with histoplasmosis, 15 presented with lesions mimicking
primary neoplasia or simulating metastases. The most common clinical symptoms were
fever, cough, weight loss, and chest pain. Five patients were asymptomatic. Of the 15
patients, 9 had a history of cancer and presented with lesions simulating metastases (HC
group; Figure 1), and 6 patients had no history of
cancer and presented with at least one lesion mimicking primary malignancy (NHC group;
Figure 2).
Figure 1Pulmonary histoplasmosis in a 29-year-old female patient with a history of
melanoma and treatment with antineoplastic agents (patient 5). The CT scans
reveal multiple, sharply circumscribed, randomly distributed nodules,
predominantly in the left lung.
Figure 2Histoplasmoma in a 66-year-old male patient with arterial hypertension
(patient 11). In A, a posteroanterior chest X-ray and, in B, a CT scan of the
chest revealing a homogeneous consolidation (3 cm in diameter) in the upper
segment of the right lower lobe.
Clinical, demographic, and biochemical findings are shown in Table 1. The age of the patients ranged from 13 to 67 years (median,
44 years). Of the 15 patients, 14 (93%) presented with pulmonary lesions at the time of
hospitalization. In all 15 patients, the diagnosis of histoplasmosis was made by
demonstrating oval budding yeasts, typical of H. capsulatum, on biopsy
specimens stained with methenamine silver. The diagnosis was confirmed by culture in
only 4 cases, although culture was requested in only 5. Seven patients were tested for
the presence of specific antibodies to H. capsulatum, and 6 of those 7
tested negative.

Discussion
The results of the present study underscore the fact that the clinical syndrome of
neoplastic disease is not confined to malignancy and that granulomatous infectious
diseases must be considered in the differential diagnosis. Excluding histoplasmosis from
the differential diagnosis of pulmonary lesions can delay the diagnostic process.
There are sporadic reports of patients with histoplasmosis that have been misdiagnosed
as having head and neck cancer,(
2
,
12
) primary lung cancer,(
13
-
15
)
or lymphoma.(
16
,
17
) In such cases, the cytological examination of the pleural
fluid can suggest neoplasia, because giant cells in which H. capsulatum
is present could be mistaken for malignant lymphoblasts.(
18
) It is of
interest that histoplasmosis granuloma might be associated with a type of lung
carcinoma.(
14
) On CT scans, as well as on scans made with more advanced
imaging techniques, such as positron emission tomography, histoplasmosis can mimic
malignant lesions.
Immunocompromised patients, such as those in our HC group, are more susceptible to
disseminated disease. In the literature, approximately two-thirds of patients with
chronic disseminated histoplasmosis present with oropharyngeal or laryngeal involvement,
which is almost invariably the clinical feature that leads to the
diagnosis,(
19
) and one of our patients (patient 6) presented with this
type of lesion. In addition, adrenal involvement has been found in over half of all
patients with disseminated histoplasmosis, the lesions being more commonly found in the
zona reticularis; this could be due to the presence of higher downstream concentrations
of cortisol, en route from secretion to the medullary central venous
system.(
19
) Three of the patients in the HC group had disseminated
disease. Of those 3, only 1 was submitted to autopsy (case 1), which showed adrenal
involvement. Cutaneous lesions of disseminated histoplasmosis are infrequent, being most
commonly found in individuals who are infected with HIV,(
20
) which nearly
none of our patients were.
The patients in the NHC group demonstrated that histoplasmosis could occur in
individuals who are not apparently immunocompromised. Because imaging findings often
mimic other granulomatous infections and neoplastic processes, they are not considered
diagnostic.(
17
) Histoplasmosis in the mediastinum is an uncommon diagnosis
that has a presentation similar to that of other benign and neoplastic conditions
encountered in the chest.(
21
) The principle that a solitary circumscribed
pulmonary nodule is diagnostic of carcinoma unless proven otherwise has been well
established (patients 4, 11, 12, and 13), especially in cases of enlarging
histoplasmoma.(
22
)
The diagnostic approach depends on the type of infection and the amount of microconidia
inhaled. A variety of tests, including culture, specific staining for fungal cells,
antigen detection, and serologic tests for antibodies, are used for the diagnosis of
histoplasmosis. The sensitivity of laboratory tests depends on the clinical
manifestation of histoplasmosis (disseminated, chronic pulmonary, or
self-limiting).(
20
) We observed these differences and the importance of
using more than one diagnostic method. In our cohort, the patients with histoplasmoma
(patients 11 and 12) showed no specific antibodies to H. capsulatum;
this also can happen in immunocompromised patients with positive
cultures.(
20
) This information can be helpful because the absence of
specific antibodies is usually associated with the absence of infection in
immunocompetent patients.
In conclusion, histoplasmosis should be considered in the differential diagnosis of
primary and metastatic lung cancer, because delaying treatment can allow severe
manifestations of the former to occur.
