[Abstract, Introduction, Methods, Results, Discussion]

Pulmonary tuberculosis and lung cancer: simultaneous
and sequential occurrence*. OBJECTIVE:  Lung cancer (LC) is the leading cause of cancer-related death and represents a major public health problem worldwide. Another major cause of morbidity and mortality, especially in developing countries, is tuberculosis. The simultaneous or sequential occurrence of pulmonary tuberculosis and LC in the same patient has been reported in various case series and case-control studies. The objective of this study was to describe the characteristics of patients developing tuberculosis and LC, either simultaneously or sequentially.    METHODS:  This was a cross-sectional study based on the review of medical charts.    RESULTS:  The study involved 24 patients diagnosed with tuberculosis and LC between 2009 and 2012. The diagnoses of tuberculosis and LC occurred simultaneously in 10 patients, whereas tuberculosis was diagnosed prior to LC in 14. The median time between the two diagnoses was 5 years (interquartile range: 1-30 years). Fourteen patients (58.3%) were male, 20 (83.3%) were White, and 22 (91.7%) were smokers or former smokers. The most common histological type was adenocarcinoma, identified in 14 cases (58.3%), followed by epidermoid carcinoma, identified in 6 (25.0%). Seven patients (29.2%) presented with distant metastases at diagnosis; of those 7 patients, 5 (71%) were diagnosed with LC and tuberculosis simultaneously.     CONCLUSIONS:  In the present study, most of the patients with tuberculosis and LC were smokers or former smokers, and tuberculosis was diagnosed either before or simultaneously with LC. Non-small cell lung cancer, especially adenocarcinoma, was the most common histological type.

Introduction
Lung cancer (LC) is the most deadly type of cancer and represents a major public
health problem worldwide. It is the leading cause of cancer-related death in Brazil
and in the world, with 1.3 million deaths annually.(
1
) Another major cause of morbidity and mortality, especially in
developing countries, is tuberculosis.(
2
)
It has been suggested that inflammation and pulmonary fibrosis caused by tuberculosis
can induce genetic damage, which can increase LC risk.(
3
-
5
) The increased occurrence of LC in patients with tuberculosis can also
be related to infection-induced immunosuppression.(
6
) In contrast, cancer-induced or chemotherapy-induced immunosuppression
can also lead to increased rates of tuberculosis reactivation in patients with solid
tumors.(
7
)
The simultaneous or sequential occurrence of pulmonary tuberculosis and LC in the
same patient has been reported in various case series and case-control
studies.(
8
-
13
) The association between these two diseases is important, since both are
quite prevalent and have a major impact on public health. In addition, considering
that one study(
10
) demonstrated that the association between tuberculosis and LC varies in
different ethnic groups and also in different regions, it is important to know the
characteristics of these cases in Brazil. Therefore, the objective of this study was
to describe the clinical characteristics of patients with pulmonary tuberculosis and
LC.

Methods
This was a cross-sectional study, involving retrospective data collection, conducted
in order to determine the characteristics of patients with tuberculosis and LC who
were treated at the Hospital de Clinicas de Porto Alegre (HCPA,
Porto Alegre Hospital de Clinicas), located in the city of Porto
Alegre, southern Brazil. The HCPA is a general tertiary university hospital with 750
beds and approximately 30,000 hospitalizations annually. The HCPA Research Ethics
Committee granted permission for access to patient records. A waiver of informed
consent was obtained, and the researchers signed a confidentiality agreement.
The study involved patients diagnosed with tuberculosis and LC, either simultaneously
or sequentially. We performed a search of the files of the pulmonology outpatient
clinics for patients with tuberculosis and LC, and the electronic medical records of
these patients were reviewed. A standardized form was completed for each patient
included in the study. Demographic data and data relating to the diagnoses of
tuberculosis and LC were collected, as were pulmonary function test results.
The diagnosis of pulmonary tuberculosis was based on consensus criteria(
14
): positive Ziehl-Neelsen staining for AFB (two positive smears);
positive Ziehl-Neelsen staining for AFB (a positive smear and a positive culture for
Mycobacterium tuberculosis); positive Ziehl-Neelsen staining
for AFB and radiological findings consistent with pulmonary tuberculosis; a single
positive culture for M. tuberculosis; or epidemiological, clinical,
and radiological findings consistent with pulmonary tuberculosis, associated with a
favorable response to treatment with antituberculosis drugs. The diagnosis of LC was
based on anatomopathological findings.
The diagnoses of LC and tuberculosis were classified by timing as follows:
simultaneous-when the diagnoses of tuberculosis and LC occurred simultaneously or
when the time between the two diagnoses was < 2 months; sequential (LC
first)-when tuberculosis was diagnosed >= 2 after LC diagnosis and within 12 months
of completion of LC treatment; sequential (tuberculosis first)-when LC is diagnosed
>= 2 months after tuberculosis diagnosis, indefinitely, because of the possibility of
scar cancer.(
10
,
15
,
16
)
The data were entered into Microsoft Excel spreadsheets, after which they were
processed and analyzed with the Statistical Package for the Social Sciences, version
18.0 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA). We carried out a descriptive analysis of the
study variables. Quantitative data are presented as mean +- SD. Qualitative data are
expressed as n (%).

Results
The study involved 24 patients diagnosed with tuberculosis and LC between 2009 and
2012. The principal characteristics of the patients are shown in Table 1. In 10 of the 24 patients, the
diagnoses of tuberculosis and LC occurred simultaneously, whereas, in 14,
tuberculosis was diagnosed before LC. The median time between the two diagnoses was
5 years (interquartile range: 1-30 years).
Three patients (12.5%) reported having had tuberculosis twice. The diagnosis of
tuberculosis was established by the following methods: smear microscopy of
spontaneous sputum, in 3 patients; culture of spontaneous sputum, in 2; smear
microscopy of induced sputum, in 2; bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) culture, in 2; PCR
positivity for M. tuberculosis in BAL samples, in 4; and clinical
and radiological findings consistent with tuberculosis, in 11.
Tuberculosis treatment was as follows: a regimen consisting of rifampin, isoniazid,
and pyrazinamide, in 11 patients (45.8%); and a regimen consisting of rifampin,
isoniazid, pyrazinamide, and ethambutol, in 7 (29.2%). In 6 patients (25.0%), data
on treatment regimen were either not provided or unavailable. Only 1 patient (4.2%)
reported noncompliance with tuberculosis treatment, 3 (12.5%) died, and 16 (66.7%)
were discharged as cured. For 5 (20.8%) of the patients, no treatment outcome data
were available.
The mean age at LC diagnosis was 62.8 +- 10.6 years. Of the 24 patients, 7 (29.2%)
presented with distant metastases at diagnosis; of those 7 patients, 71% were
diagnosed with LC and tuberculosis simultaneously. The following LC treatments were
performed: radiotherapy alone, in 6 patients (25.0%); chemotherapy and radiotherapy,
in 4 (16.7%); surgery alone, in 3 (12.5%); chemotherapy alone, 2 (8.3%); surgery and
radiotherapy, in 2 (8.3%); surgery and chemotherapy, in 2 (8.3%); and supportive
treatment alone, in 5 (20.8%).

Discussion
In this study, we described the characteristics of 24 patients developing
tuberculosis and LC, either simultaneously or sequentially. Tuberculosis was
diagnosed before LC in most of the patients, and in none of the cases was LC
diagnosed before tuberculosis. Non-small cell lung cancer, especially
adenocarcinoma, was the most common histological type.
The coexistence of pulmonary tuberculosis and LC was first described in 1810, and it
was demonstrated histologically a few years later.(
9
) Since then, several studies on this association have been published,
most of which are case series and case-control studies.(
8
-
13
) However, it has always been questioned whether this association was
casual or whether it could be explained by a plausible biological mechanism. One
hypothesis would be that inflammation associated with infections can contribute to
carcinogenesis.(
4
) Reactive oxygen or nitrogen species produced by activated neutrophils
can bind to the DNA, inducing genetic damage and neoplastic
transformation.(
17
,
18
) In fact, it has been shown that alterations of the fragile histidine
triad gene might be involved in lung carcinogenesis in patients with chronic
pulmonary tuberculosis.(
19
-
21
) In addition, during tissue repair, there is increased cell
proliferation and angiogenesis, and the epithelium is more prone to metaplasia.
Furthermore, carcinogens concentrate preferentially in hyperactive areas to induce
neoplastic changes.(
22
,
23
)
The cases described here are similar to those reported in previous
studies.(
8
-
13
) Adenocarcinoma was the most common histological type in our case
series. In a meta-analysis(
10
) of 37 case-control studies and 4 cohort studies, the association
between tuberculosis and LC was significant for adenocarcinoma (relative risk =
1.6), but not for epidermoid carcinoma or small cell carcinoma. In a case series of
LC in Japan,(
24
) adenocarcinoma was also the most common cancer. Another
study(
9
) demonstrated that all scar carcinomas were adenocarcinomas, and that,
even in cases in which there was no proximity between the scar and the neoplasm,
adenocarcinoma was the most common histological type.
The vast majority of the patients described here were smokers or former smokers.
Despite the cumulative effects of tobacco as a carcinogen, the relationship between
pulmonary tuberculosis and LC persists even after control for smoking, with cancer
risk being 2.5-fold higher among patients with tuberculosis.(
6
,
8
,
25
) A meta-analysis(
10
) corroborated this evidence, showing that the association between
tuberculosis and LC was not due to the effects of smoking, because, when considering
only nonsmoking patients, there was a 1.78-fold increase in LC risk among patients
with tuberculosis. That same meta-analysis demonstrated that the association between
tuberculosis and LC was not due to the time since diagnosis of tuberculosis. Because
the initial symptoms of LC can be mistaken for the symptoms of pulmonary
tuberculosis, that analysis was restricted to studies in which tuberculosis was
diagnosed more than 1 year before cancer, in order to minimize this bias. The
studies were grouped by time between the two diagnoses (1-5, 6-10, 11-20, and more
than 20 years). The increase in cancer risk was higher in the first 5 years after
tuberculosis; diagnosis; however, the risk remained 1.99-fold higher among those for
whom the time between the diagnoses was more than 20 years. This was true in our
sample as well, given that the median time between the diagnoses of tuberculosis and
LC was 5 years (interquartile range: 1-30 years). Another, more recent
study(
11
) showed that LC risk was highest in the 2-year window after tuberculosis
diagnosis (OR = 5.01) but remained elevated even 2 years after diagnosis (OR =
1.53).
Approximately 30% of the patients presented with distant metastases at LC diagnosis.
Of those, 71% were diagnosed with LC and tuberculosis simultaneously. Another case
series found that 50% of the patients had stage IV LC.(
24
) Because the initial symptoms of these two diseases are similar, it
should be considered that there can be a delay in the diagnosis of either condition
and, consequently, patients can present with either LC or tuberculosis at a more
advanced stage.(
26
)
In none of our reported cases was LC diagnosed before pulmonary tuberculosis. In
contrast, in a recent, retrospective case-control study(
15
) involving 36 patients with LC, 10 (27.8%) were diagnosed with
tuberculosis and cancer concomitantly, whereas 26 (72.2%) were diagnosed with
tuberculosis after being diagnosed with cancer. In a case series conducted in
Japan,(
24
) the diagnoses were concomitant in 6 patients, tuberculosis was
diagnosed before LC in 5 cases, and LC was diagnosed before tuberculosis in the
remaining 5. It is possible that tuberculosis was diagnosed before LC more
frequently because of a reverse causality bias, i.e., an occult cancer can reduce
immunity and lead to reactivation of latent tuberculosis. Therefore, tuberculosis
can present clinically before LC.(
16
,
19
)
Our study has limitations that need to be considered. The major one is that the cases
were identified retrospectively on the basis of a search of the files of the
specialized outpatient clinics at our hospital. Retrospective studies are at risk of
selection bias (cases lost to follow-up) and measurement bias (data obtained from
medical records). We should also consider the Berkson bias, in which patients with
an index diagnosis are more likely to be diagnosed with another disease than are
those without an index diagnosis. For instance, patients with tuberculosis, at
follow-up chest X-ray, are more prone to be diagnosed with cancer than are those not
diagnosed with tuberculosis.(
27
) Nevertheless, because the occurrence of tuberculosis and LC, either
simultaneously or not, may have different characteristics according to ethnic group
and region,(
10
) it is relevant that cases identified locally be described. In addition,
the importance of these cases lies in the fact that patients diagnosed with
tuberculosis should be advised to avoid lung carcinogens, such as tobacco smoking,
as much as possible, since these agents contribute to a substantial increase in LC
risk.
In conclusion, the present study demonstrated that most of the patients with
tuberculosis and LC were smokers, and that tuberculosis was diagnosed either before
or simultaneously with LC. Non-small cell lung cancer, especially adenocarcinoma,
was the most common histological type.
