[Abstract, Methods, Results, Discussion]

Circulating 25-Hydroxyvitamin D and Risk of Kidney Cancer. Although the kidney is a major organ for vitamin D metabolism, activity, and calcium-related homeostasis, little is known about whether this nutrient plays a role in the development or the inhibition of kidney cancer. To address this gap in knowledge, the authors examined the association between circulating 25-hydroxyvitamin D (25(OH)D) and kidney cancer within a large, nested case-control study developed as part of the Cohort Consortium Vitamin D Pooling Project of Rarer Cancers. Concentrations of 25(OH)D were measured from 775 kidney cancer cases and 775 age-, sex-, race-, and season-matched controls from 8 prospective cohort studies. Overall, neither low nor high concentrations of circulating 25(OH)D were significantly associated with kidney cancer risk. Although the data showed a statistically significant decreased risk for females (odds ratio = 0.31, 95% confidence interval: 0.12, 0.85) with 25(OH)D concentrations of >=75 nmol/L, the linear trend was not statistically significant and the number of cases in this category was small (n = 14). The findings from this consortium-based study do not support the hypothesis that vitamin D is inversely associated with the risk of kidney cancer overall or with renal cell carcinoma specifically.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
A detailed description of cohorts participating in VDPP and the general methods for the project are provided in a separate paper (18). Of the 10 cohorts in VDPP, the following 8 contributed cases of kidney cancer: the Alpha-Tocopherol, Beta-Carotene Cancer Prevention Study (ATBC); the Cancer Prevention Study II Nutrition Cohort (CPS-II); CLUE; the Multiethnic Cohort Study (MEC); the New York University Women's Health Study (NYU-WHS); the Prostate, Lung, Colorectal and Ovarian Cancer Screening Trial (PLCO); the Shanghai Men's Health Study (SMHS); and the Shanghai Women's Health Study (SWHS).
From these 8 cohorts, plasma/serum samples from 783 kidney cancer cases and 783 controls, alive and not diagnosed with cancer at the time of case diagnosis, and matched on age at blood collection (+-1 year), sex, race (white/black/Asian/other), and date of blood draw (+-30 days), were sent to the laboratory for measurement of circulating 25(OH)D. Five cases were excluded after 25(OH)D measurement because they were found to have cancer of the ureter (International Classification of Diseases, Eighth Revision (ICD-8)/International Classification of Diseases, Ninth Revision (ICD-9) code 189.2 or International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems, Tenth Revision (ICD-10) code C66 or International Classification of Diseases for Oncology (ICD-O) code C66.9) or cancer of a urinary organ, site unspecified (ICD-8/ICD-9 code 189.9 or ICD-10 code C68 or ICD-O code C68-C68.9). Furthermore, 2 cases were excluded after 25(OH)D measurement because their date of diagnosis was prior to their date of blood draw, and 1 control was excluded because no 25(OH)D data were returned from the laboratory. The remaining 776 cases and 782 controls were eligible to be included in the analytic data set. Because only matched pairs were analyzed, the final analytic data set consisted of 775 matched case-control pairs. Cases included 708 with renal cell carcinoma (ICD-8/ICD-9 code 189.0 or ICD-10 code C64 or ICD-O code 64.9) and 67 with carcinoma of the renal pelvis (ICD-8/ICD-9 code 189.1 or ICD-9/ICD-10 code C65 or ICD-O code 65.9).
All serum/plasma samples were measured for 25(OH)D at Heartland Assays, Inc., as described in Gallicchio et al. (18). The quality control measures included use of samples of the vitamin D standard from the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) at both a "normal" (~65 nmol/L) and a "low" (~35 nmol/L) level. As reported in Gallicchio et al. (18) for the VDPP, interbatch and intrabatch coefficients of variation for low-level samples were 12.7% and 9.3%, respectively; interbatch and intrabatch coefficients of variation for normal-level samples were 13.6% and 11.0%, respectively. The median interbatch coefficient of variation for the cohort quality control samples was 13.2% (range: 4.8%-17.0%); the median intrabatch coefficient of variation for the cohort quality control samples was 9.9% (range: 3.8%-16.4%).
The main analyses described in this paper were conducted by using clinically defined cutpoints (4, 19, 20): <25 nmol/L, 25-<37.5 nmol/L, 37.5-<50 nmol/L, 50-<75 nmol/L, 75-<100 nmol/L, and >=100 nmol/L. The referent category chosen was 50-<75 nmol/L because this range includes the mean level of the US population (62.91 nmol/L, standard error of the mean, 0.81 for males; 61.54 nmol/L, standard error of the mean, 0.85 for females) according to 2000-2004 National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey data (21).
In addition to the core VDPP variables, the following additional variables were requested for inclusion in the kidney cancer analyses: family history of renal cancer, history of high blood pressure at blood draw, and history of diabetes at blood draw. The Wald statistic, generated by using conditional logistic regression, was used to test the significance of differences between the kidney cancer cases and controls for selected variables, including median 25(OH)D concentrations. Variables in the VDPP data set that were 1) associated with both 25(OH)D and kidney cancer or 2) identified based on the literature as risk factors for kidney cancer, or both, were included in the fully adjusted models; these variables were education, body mass index, height, smoking status, current alcohol drinking, history of high blood pressure; and history of diabetes. All of these variables were treated as categorical in the model with the exception of height, which was treated as a continuous variable. Data on physical activity were also obtained because this variable has been shown to be associated with both kidney cancer and circulating 25(OH)D (22, 23); however, this variable may be in the causal pathway and not a confounder. For this reason, physical activity was not included in the fully adjusted model.
Conditional logistic regression models adjusting for the variables listed above were constructed to estimate the overall odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals for kidney cancer by 25(OH)D concentration, examined by using the 6-category clinically defined cutpoint variable. Trend tests were conducted by assigning values of 1-6 to the respective 25(OH)D categories and treating the new variable as continuous in the model. Unconditional logistic regression analyses using a 5-category 25(OH)D variable with the categories of 75-<100 nmol/L and >=100 nmol/L combined adjusting for the matching factors and the other potential confounders listed above were also conducted to examine the associations between 25(OH)D and kidney cancer in strata based on predefined categories of sex, season (winter/summer), age at blood collection, race, latitude, length of follow-up, calcium intake/supplementation, body mass index, cigarette smoking, history of high blood pressure, and history of diabetes. No differences in the investigated association were observed in these stratified analyses; thus, with the exception of the sex- and season-specific analyses, the results of the stratified analyses are not presented here.
Additionally, pooled analyses using cohort-, sex-, and season-specific quartile cutpoints (using the 2-season variable), based on the distribution of circulating 25(OH)D among all controls from all VDPP cancer sites combined, were also conducted. Both conditional and unconditional models were run with the lowest fourth as the referent category; the results were similar. Analyses to adjust for season using the residual method were also conducted, as described in Gallicchio et al. (18). Residual adjustment for season takes into account the gradual nature of changes in concentrations of 25(OH)D over the year, which may be better than adjusting for season. For the residual analyses, conditional logistic regression models were run with the lowest fourth as the referent category.
All analyses described above were conducted for all kidney cancer cases (and matched controls) and then for renal cell carcinoma cases (and matched controls) only. Analyses were also conducted by excluding cases (and matched controls) diagnosed within 2 years of blood draw. Because the resulting estimates from these analyses were similar, only the stratified results based on all cases (and matched controls) are presented.
Finally, meta-analyses were conducted to examine the overall and sex-specific associations of both low (<25 nmol/L) and high (>=75 nmol/L) concentrations of circulating 25(OH)D compared with the referent category of 50-<75 nmol/L with kidney cancer for all of the contributing study cohorts. Pooled multivariate log odds ratio estimates adjusted for the covariates in the models described above (e.g., education, body mass index, high blood pressure) were obtained by using inverse-variance weights in random-effects models. Statistical heterogeneity was assessed by using the DerSimonian and Laird Q statistic (24). Because of small numbers of cases and controls in the Shanghai Women's Health Study and the Shanghai Men's Health Study, data from these cohorts were combined for the overall meta-analyses. In addition, because of small numbers (<=1 case in the high or low 25(OH)D category), not all cohorts contributed to all of the meta-analyses. Specifically, the New York University Women's Health Study dropped out of the overall and female-specific high versus referent 25(OH)D concentration meta-analyses; CLUE, the Cancer Prevention Study II Nutrition Cohort, and the Multiethnic Cohort Study dropped out of the female-specific low versus referent 25(OH)D concentration meta-analyses; and the Cancer Prevention Study II Nutrition Cohort, the Multiethnic Cohort Study, and the Prostate, Lung, Colorectal and Ovarian Cancer Screening Trial dropped out of the female-specific high versus referent 25(OH)D concentration meta-analyses. To explore the influence of each cohort on the results, the meta-analyses described above were repeated by excluding one cohort at a time.
Statistical analyses were performed by using SAS software, versions 9.1.3 and 9.2 (SAS Institute, Inc., Cary, North Carolina). All meta-analyses were conducted by using the R function MiMa (25) in R version 2.8.1 (The R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria).

RESULTS
Overall, the median follow-up time for cases (time from blood draw to case diagnosis) was 5.5 years (interquartile range: 2.7-9.9) (Table 1). Median circulating 25(OH)D for the kidney cancer cases and controls was 44.4 nmol/L (interquartile range: 30.7-62.9) and 45.4 nmol/L (interquartile range: 30.2-62.5), respectively (P = 0.71).
The distribution of selected characteristics of the cases and controls is shown in Table 2. Approximately 75% of the participants were male, the majority were white (80.4% of cases and 80.1% of controls), and the median age at blood collection of both cases and controls, overall, was 60 years. For both males and females, cases were more likely than controls to report a history of high blood pressure. Among males, but not females, cases were taller, had a higher mean body mass index, were more likely to be categorized as overweight or obese, and were more likely to report being a current smoker compared with controls (data not shown). There were no statistically significant differences among cases and controls with respect to dietary intake or supplement use variables.
As shown in Table 3, 25(OH)D concentrations were not significantly associated with the risk of developing kidney cancer for males and females combined (P-trend = 0.76). Adjustment for covariates that have been shown in previous studies to be associated with kidney cancer, including body mass index, height, smoking status, history of high blood pressure, current alcohol drinking, and education, did not significantly change the results (P-trend = 0.86). Similar results for the unadjusted and adjusted conditional logistic regression modeling were obtained when examining renal cell carcinomas only (P-trend = 0.67 for the multivariate-adjusted model) and when limiting the sample to cases diagnosed more than 2 years after blood draw and their matched controls (P-trend = 0.95 for the multivariate-adjusted model). After excluding subjects from the Alpha-Tocopherol, Beta-Carotene Cancer Prevention Study, who constituted 36.9% of the sample, the multivariate-adjusted odds ratios for the highest and lowest categories of 25(OH)D tended to be more inverse at both the high and low extremes compared with the analysis including all cohorts (<25 nmol/L odds ratio (OR) = 0.75, 95% confidence interval (CI): 0.40, 1.41; >=100 nmol/L OR = 0.57, 95% CI: 0.27, 1.17; P-trend = 0.32). Analyses using the pooled cohort-, sex-, and season-specific quartile cutpoints, as well as those using residual adjustment for season, showed no increase or decrease in risk of kidney cancer or renal cell carcinoma in the highest quartile compared with the lowest quartile of circulating 25(OH)D (data not shown).
In the analyses stratified by sex (Table 4), low concentrations of circulating 25(OH)D were not associated with kidney cancer risk for either males (OR = 1.04, 95% CI: 0.68, 1.58) or females (OR = 0.66, 95% CI: 0.24, 1.77). High 25(OH)D concentrations (>=75 nmol/L) were associated with a nonstatistically significant increased risk of kidney cancer for males (OR = 1.52, 95% CI: 0.95, 2.41), even after excluding cohort subjects from the Alpha-Tocopherol, Beta-Carotene Cancer Prevention Study (OR = 1.52, 95% CI: 0.89, 2.59). In contrast, among females, high concentrations of 25(OH)D were associated with a statistically significant decreased risk of kidney cancer (OR = 0.31, 95% CI: 0.12, 0.85). Overall, there was no statistical evidence of a sex-25(OH)D interaction (P = 0.42). No differences in the associations between circulating 25(OH)D and kidney cancer were observed for individuals who had their blood drawn in the winter season compared with individuals who had their blood drawn in the summer season.
The associations with kidney cancer for both low (<37.5 nmol/L) and high (>=75 nmol/L) concentrations of circulating 25(OH)D compared with the referent category of 50-<75 nmol/L in each of the contributing study populations are shown on Figure 1. Overall, the pooled odds ratios for the high and low categories of 25(OH)D versus the referent category were 1.01 (95% CI: 0.65, 1.58) and 1.12 (95% CI: 0.79, 1.59), respectively. The pooled odds ratios for males and females for the high category of 25(OH)D versus the referent category were 1.33 (95% CI: 0.80, 2.24) and 0.52 (95% CI: 0.06, 4.89), respectively. The pooled odds ratios for males and females for the lowest category of 25(OH)D versus the referent category were 1.07 (95% CI: 0.71, 1.61) and 0.73 (95% CI: 0.17, 3.22), respectively. There was no evidence of statistical heterogeneity across studies in any of the meta-analyses (data not shown). Results from analyses that excluded cohorts one at a time showed no substantial changes in the pooled odds ratios.
Figure 1.
Forest plots for the meta-analysis of the association between circulating 25-hydroxyvitamin D (25(OH)D) and the risk of kidney cancer within the Cohort Consortium Vitamin D Pooling Project of Rarer Cancers. Risk estimates, by cohort, for subjects with circulating 25(OH)D concentrations of A) <37.5 nmol/L and B) >=75 nmol/L compared with the referent group (50-<75 nmol/L). Odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were derived from conditional logistic regression models adjusted for education, body mass index, height, smoking status, history of high blood pressure, history of diabetes, and alcohol drinking. The boxes show the odds ratios, the bars show the 95% confidence intervals, and the size of each box is inversely proportional to the variance of the log odds ratio estimate in each cohort. The overall estimates (diamonds) were derived from a meta-analysis using random-effects modeling. NYU-WHS data are not included in the highest versus reference category forest plot (B) because there were zero cases of kidney cancer among cases in the highest category. ATBC, Alpha-Tocopherol, Beta-Carotene Cancer Prevention Study; CPS-II, Cancer Prevention Study II Nutrition Cohort; MEC, Multiethnic Cohort Study; NYU-WHS, New York University Women's Health Study; PLCO, Prostate, Lung, Colorectal and Ovarian Cancer Screening Trial; SMHS/SWHS, Shanghai Men's Health Study/Shanghai Women's Health Study.

DISCUSSION
The findings from this large consortium-based prospective study do not support the hypothesis that circulating 25(OH)D concentrations are associated with the risk of kidney cancer overall or the renal cell carcinoma subtype. Although our data suggest a possible decrease in risk for females associated with high 25(OH)D concentrations (>=75 nmol/L), the linear trend was not statistically significant and the number of cases in this category was small (n = 14). The overall null results we report for kidney cancer are similar to the results examining circulating 25(OH)D in relation to the other VDPP rarer cancer outcomes, including endometrial cancer (26), ovarian cancer (27), upper gastrointestinal cancer (28), and non-Hodgkin lymphoma (29). In contrast, the data from VDPP indicate an increased risk of pancreatic cancer associated with 25(OH)D concentrations of 100 nmol/L or more (30).
Despite the fact that the kidney is a major organ for vitamin D metabolism and activity, few studies have been conducted on vitamin D and kidney cancer. To our knowledge, there are no prospective serum-based investigations, and all published studies examined dietary intake of vitamin D as a measure of vitamin D status. All but one of these studies, however, reported findings consistent with our overall null result. For example, prospective cohort studies of male smokers in Finland (the Alpha-Tocopherol, Beta-Carotene Cancer Prevention Study) and women in Iowa (the Iowa Women's Health Study) showed no statistically significant association between vitamin D intake and renal cell carcinoma after adjustment for age (15) and other potential confounders such as high blood pressure (17). Furthermore, a case-control study conducted in Denmark showed no association between the intake of individual foods rich in vitamin D (i.e., fish and eggs) and renal cell carcinoma risk (16), and a large case-control study conducted in central and eastern Europe observed no statistically significant increase or decrease in renal cell carcinoma risk with total vitamin D intake (31). In contrast, one Italian case-control study of 767 cases and 1,532 controls reported a statistically significant inverse association between dietary vitamin D intake, based on a 78-item food frequency questionnaire, and the risk of renal cell carcinoma; however, this finding was observed among only females (OR = 0.60), participants with a high body mass index (>=25 kg/m2) (OR = 0.65), and never smokers (OR = 0.61).
In general, studies, primarily ecologic, investigating the association between cancer risk and sun exposure have reported an inverse relation between kidney cancer incidence and mortality with ultraviolet B light exposure (12, 13, 32-34). For example, Mohr et al. (12) examined the association between ultraviolet B exposure and renal cancer risk in 175 countries using latitude and solar ultraviolet B irradiance. For both males and females, the highest renal carcinoma risk rates were found in countries situated at the highest latitudes. Furthermore, an occupational cohort study exploring the relation between ultraviolet exposure and cancer risk among Swedish male construction workers found that participants exposed to the highest level of occupational sunlight had a reduced kidney cancer risk (35). Additionally, a recent central and eastern European case-control study reported inverse associations between occupational ultraviolet exposure and renal cell carcinoma risk that, after stratification, were limited to males residing in the highest latitudes (36). Similar inverse associations in case-control studies have been reported between occupational sunlight exposures and other cancers such as diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, follicular lymphoma, and rectal and prostate cancer (refer, for example, to Boffetta et al. (37), Slattery et al. (38), and John et al. (39)).
A major strength of the present investigation is the inclusion of a large number of kidney cancer cases from multiple cohort studies that incorporated a wide range of vitamin D concentrations and latitudes. Furthermore, since the study is prospective, with vitamin D status assessed from blood samples collected before cancer diagnosis, the influence of reverse causality was minimized. Moreover, circulating 25(OH)D concentrations were assayed by a single laboratory to reduce interlaboratory variation. Additionally, this measure of vitamin D exposure represents an internal dose that includes the 2 major sources of vitamin D: sun exposure and intake. Finally, this study collected data on a number of potential confounders such as high blood pressure and body mass index that were used in the analysis to allow for a more accurate estimation of the association between 25(OH)D and kidney cancer risk.
Limitations of our study include measurement of only a single blood sample; 25(OH)D measurements from multiple time points would have resulted in more precise estimates of exposure. However, it should be noted that data from several studies suggest that 25(OH)D concentrations are relatively stable when samples are collected during the same season in different years. For example, a study conducted in the New York University Women's Health Study found an intraclass correlation coefficient for circulating 25(OH)D of 0.78 (95% CI: 0.64, 0.88) in 30 healthy women who contributed 3 samples each at yearly intervals (Anne Zeleniuch-Jacquotte, New York University School of Medicine, personal communication, 2009). Other limitations include the possibility that the etiologically relevant time period of exposure was missed with the single blood sample and limited power to examine associations among subgroups with a small number of cases.
In summary, the combined data from 8 prospective cohort studies do not support the hypothesis that higher circulating 25(OH)D measured in prediagnostic blood specimens is associated with a decreased risk of kidney cancer overall or with renal cell carcinoma specifically.
