[Abstract, Methods, Results, Discussion, Mixed]

Inadequate Activation of the GTPase RhoA Contributes to the Lack of
 Fibronectin Matrix Assembly in von Hippel-Lindau Protein-defective Renal
 Cancer
 Cells*S. The von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) tumor suppressor gene regulates extracellular  matrix deposition. In VHL negative renal cancer cells, VHL(-), the lack of  fibronectin matrix assembly is thought to promote and maintain tumor  angiogenesis allowing vessels to infiltrate tumors. Therefore, and considering  the importance of this process in tumor growth, we aimed to study why VHL(-)  renal cancer cells fail to form a proper extracellular matrix. Our results  showed that VHL(-) cells were not defective in fibronectin production and that  the fibronectin produced by these cells was equally functional in promoting  cell adhesion and matrix assembly as that produced by VHL(+) cells. We have  previously reported that VHL(-) cells fail to form b1 integrin fibrillar  adhesions and have a diminished organization of actin stress fibers;  therefore, we aimed to study if the small GTPase family is involved in this  process. We found that activation of the RhoA GTPase was defective in VHL(-)  cells, and this was possibly mediated by an increased activation of its  inhibitor, p190RhoGAP. Additionally, the expression of constitutively active  RhoA in VHL(-) cells resulted in formation of a fibronectin matrix. These  results strongly suggest an important role for RhoA in some of the defects  observed in renal cancer cells.

EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURESCell Culture--786-O cells lacking VHL (RC3) and subclones
 stably producing wild-type VHL (WT8)
 (34), or different VHL mutants
 such as L188V (type 2C mutant)
 (35), RRR, and KRR (type 2C
 mutant) (36), Y112H (type 2A
 mutant), and C162F (type 2B) mutant. These mutants were provided by Dr.
 Michael Ohh (University of Toronto, Canada): parental RCC4 and RCC10 and
 subclones stably producing wild-type VHL
 (37) and parental UMRC cell
 lines and their stable VHL transfectants. Cell lines were all maintained as
 previously described (16).Antibodies and Reagents--Polyclonal anti-FN antibody was from
 Sigma. Anti-RhoA was from Santa Cruz Biotechnology, anti-p190RhoGAP from
 Upstate, and anti-phosphotyrosine antibody PY20 was from Biomol. Anti-paxillin
 was from BD Biosciences, and anti-activated b1 integrin (HUTS21) was
 generously provided by Dr. Carlos Cabanas (CSIC). LPA and
 2,3-butanedione-monoxime (BDM) were from Sigma, and the Rho kinase inhibitor
 Y-27632 was from Calbiochem.Isolation of Deoxycholate-soluble and -insoluble
 Materials--Cells were cultured in 6-well plates with RPMI 1640 and
 GLUTAMAX-I (Invitrogen) supplemented with 5% FN-free fetal bovine serum.
 Deoxycholate-soluble and -insoluble material were obtained as described
 elsewhere (38). A detailed
 protocol is described under supplemental data.Immunofluorescence Microscopy--Immunofluorescence staining
 was performed as previously described
 (14). A detailed protocol is
 described under supplemental data.Quantitative Real Time PCR Analysis--Quantitative RNA
 analysis protocol and primer pairs for b-actin have been described
 elsewhere (39). FN primers
 used and a detailed protocol are described under supplemental data.Cell Adhesion Assay--FN purified from VHL(+) or (-) cells was
 absorbed at 5 mg/ml onto Maxisorb 96-well plates (Costar). The wells were
 aspirated and blocked with 1% BSA/PBS for 30 min. Cells (20 x
 103/well) were resuspended in M199/0.1% BSA and incubated for 1 h
 at 37 degC in 5% CO2. After washing with PBS, cells were fixed
 with 1% glutaraldehyde/PBS and stained with 1% crystal violet/PBS. Cells were
 washed with distilled water, and the absorbance at 590 nm was determined on an
 ORION-2 plate reader. A negative control consisting of cells attached to BSA
 was subtracted from each sample.RhoA Activity Assay--RhoA activity was measured using a
 GST-rhotekin-Rho binding domain (GST-C21), a gift of Dr. John Collard (The
 Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The Netherlands). Briefly, a total of
 7 x 106 cells were lysed in radioimmune precipitation assay
 lysis buffer. After centrifugation (20,000 x g, 15 min, 4
 degC), equal amounts of protein from the supernatant were incubated
 overnight at 4 degC with beads coated with GST-C21. Beads were washed, and
 bound protein was eluted by boiling in Laemmli buffer. Total and bound RhoA
 subjected to electrophoresis and transferred to nitrocellulose membranes were
 detected using an anti-RhoA mAb. For statistical purposes, gels from active
 and total RhoA normalized with respect to the loading control were subjected
 to densitometric analysis and analyzed using the Quantity-One(tm) program
 (Bio-Rad).Analysis of p 190RhoGAP Phosphorylation--VHL(+) and (-) RCCs
 (6 x 106) were lysed in 500 ml of radioimmune
 precipitation assay buffer. Cell supernatants were incubated overnight at 4
 degC with protein G-agarose beads (Pierce) coated with 4 mg of
 anti-p190RhoGAP mAb (Upstate) or with the IgG1 anti-CD45 T200 antibody (mock).
 Bound proteins were extracted by boiling in Laemmli buffer, subjected to
 electrophoresis, and transferred into nitrocellulose membranes. Phosphorylated
 proteins were detected using PY20 mAb followed by a horseradish
 peroxidase-labeled secondary antibody.FIGURE 2.Analysis of FN matrix organization in RCCs and pVHL mutants in the
 presence of exogenous FN. A, 786-O, RCC4, RCC10, and UMRC RCC
 cells and their counterparts expressing VHL were grown to confluence on
 uncoated or FN (10 mg/ml)-coated coverslips. After 3-4 days, cells were
 lysed, and the FN matrix was analyzed by indirect immunofluorescence using a
 polyclonal anti-FN antibody. B, type 2A (Y112H), 2B (C162F), and 2C
 (L188V, RRR and control KRR) pVHL mutants were grown under the same conditions
 as in A, and the FN matrix was analyzed after 4 days of cell culture.
 The images shown are representative of at least three experiments.FIGURE 3.Functional evaluation of FN purified from VHL(+) and
 VHL(-) RCC cells. A, cell adhesion on FN purified from
 VHL(+) and VHL(-) cell-conditioned medium using gelatin-agarose affinity
 matrices. Cells (2 x 104/well) were incubated on 96-well FN
 (5 mg/ml)-coated plates for 1 h at 37 degC in 5% CO2, fixed,
 and stained as described under "Experimental Procedures." Attached
 cells were then quantitated at 590 nm. A negative control BSA background was
 used. The average from three different experiments is represented. B,
 FN assembly was analyzed by indirect immunofluorescence staining. 786-O, RCC4,
 RCC10, and UMRC (2 x 105 cells) were plated on uncoated or FN
 (10 mg/ml)-coated coverslips, using FN purified from VHL(+) or VHL(-)
 cells. After 3-4 days of culture at 37 degC and 5% CO2, FN matrix
 formation was analyzed with a conventional immunofluorescence microscope. A
 representative experiment of at least four performed is shown.Retroviral Infection--Constructs of a constitutively active
 form (RhoA Q63L) or a dominant negative form (RhoA N19) of RhoA were kindly
 provided by Dr. Silvio Gutkind (Bethesda, MD). These constructions were
 subcloned into the BamH1/EcoR1 site of the retroviral vector pLZR IRES-GFP.
 786-O cell infection was performed as described previously
 (16). siRNA
 Transfection--Control small interfering RNA (siRNA) or siRNA
 directed to human p190RhoGAP (5'GAACAGCGAUUUAAAGCAUTT-3' and
 3'AUGCUUUAAAUCGCUGUUCTT-5') (Eurogentec) were transfected using
 Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer's instruction.
 Three days after transfection, cells were used for the experiment.

RESULTSFN mRNA and Protein Expression Levels in VHL(+) and
 VHL(-) RCC Cells Reveal No Correlation with the Ability to Assemble
 an FN Matrix--The reduced FN matrix deposition previously observed
 by immunofluorescence and ELISA studies
 (14,
 26,
 40) could be partially
 explained by an aberrant production or a defective secretion of FN in VHL(-)
 RCC cells (11,
 41). To determine whether this
 was a general phenomenon in RCCs, we first analyzed the FN mRNA and protein
 levels in several RCC cell lines and in cells with different pVHL mutations
 corresponding to types 2A, 2B, and 2C phenotype of the VHL disease. These
 included the mutants Y112H (type 2A), C162F (type 2B), L188V (type 2C), and a
 nonneddylateable version of pVHL termed RRR (type 2C), or the control termed
 KRR (36), all of them on the
 RCC 786-O background. Remarkably, FN mRNA levels measured by quantitative
 RT-PCR were significantly lower in 786-O and UMRC VHL(+) cells than in their
 corresponding VHL(-) counterparts (Fig.
 1A). Similarly, FN mRNA levels in the various pVHL
 mutants were higher when compared with the corresponding levels in 786-O
 VHL(+) cells (Fig.
 1A). In contrast, in RCC10 cells, FN mRNA expression was
 always higher in VHL(+) versus VHL(-) cells
 (Fig. 1A).We also analyzed FN protein levels in cell lysates or
 deoxycholate-insoluble fractions derived from all these cell types. In
 agreement with the mRNA data, VHL(-) and mutants derived from 786-O parental
 cells consistently showed higher FN protein expression than 786-O VHL(+) cells
 (Fig. 1B). Because
 VHL(-) cells do not assemble FN, the FN encountered in the
 deoxycholate-insoluble fraction could be due to FN interacting with other
 cytoskeletal proteins. In contrast, RCC4, RCC10, and UMRC VHL(-) cells had
 lower FN protein levels than their VHL(+) counterparts, both in lysates and in
 deoxycholate-insoluble fractions (Fig.
 1B). Therefore, protein levels did not always correspond
 with mRNA levels, and this might be partially explained by the fact that
 protein levels were measured in total cell lysates. Therefore, we discarded
 part of the FN contained in the conditioned medium. Interestingly, we purified
 FN from the conditioned medium of the different VHL(+) and (-) cell lines and
 found similar FN-secreted levels (data not shown). To further confirm the
 above conclusion, we analyzed the assembly of FN matrix in the absence or
 presence of exogenous FN. We have previously reported that addition of
 exogenous FN did not re-establish assembly in 786-O VHL(-) cells
 (14). Here we analyzed the
 assembly in three additional cell lines, RCC4, RCC10, and UMRC and in the VHL
 mutants described above. Our results showed that VHL(-) cells cultured on
 uncoated or FN-coated coverslips did not form visible FN fibrils, suggesting
 that FN availability is not exclusively responsible for their incapacity to
 form a matrix (Fig.
 2A). Interestingly, VHL(+) but not VHL(-) UMRC cells,
 only formed a visible matrix when cultured on exogenous FN
 (Fig. 2A), indicating
 that, in this particular case, low secretion of FN (see
 Fig. 1, A and
 B) might be responsible for the lack of FN matrix in this
 VHL-expressing cell line. Additionally, none of the three different mutants,
 type 2A, 2B, or 2C, were able to assemble FN even when it was exogenously
 added (Fig. 2B).
 Altogether, these results indicated a heterogeneous expression of FN on the
 various VHL(+) and VHL(-) RCCs and most importantly, that lack of matrix
 assembly by VHL(-) cells could not always be attributed to low FN production
 in these cells.FIGURE 4.FN stretching and cell matrix contacts in VHL(+) versus
 VHL(-). A, 786-O VHL(+) and VHL(-) cells were plated on
 coverslips previously coated with FN (20 mg/ml) and cultured for either 4 h
 or 24 h. Cells were fixed and permeabilized before DAPI staining (panels
 a, e, i, and m) and double immunostaining with antibodies
 against Paxillin (panels b, f, d, and h), and FN (panels
 c, g, d, and h) or activated b1 integrins (panels j, n,
 l, and p) and FN (panels k, o, l, and p).
 Samples were then analyzed with a confocal microscope. Horizontal sections are
 presented (at least six different fields were evaluated). A representative
 experiment is shown. Bar, 25 mm. Magnified areas at zoom 3x.
 B, positive cells for paxillin staining were counted, at least 10
 cells per field (at least three fields) in three independent experiments.
 Results are represented as percentage of total cells.Fibronectin Produced by VHL(-) Cells Is Functional and
 Normally Assembled into Fibrils--If FN production and secretion do
 not always explain the failure to assemble FN by VHL(-) cells, the possibility
 exists that FN produced by cells lacking VHL is malfolded or malprocessed and
 hence not functional for its assembly. We therefore studied whether the FN
 produced by VHL(-) cells was able to bind to its receptor, the a5b1
 integrin, and to form fibrils. To this end, we first performed cell adhesion
 experiments using FN purified from VHL(+) or VHL(-) cell-conditioned medium.
 As shown in Fig. 3A,
 all cell lines showed similar levels of adhesion to FN from either source, and
 this was independent of their VHL status. These results indicated that FN
 synthesized by VHL(-) cells is able to mediate cell adhesion as efficiently as
 that synthesized by VHL(+) cells. Moreover, they also indicated that the lack
 of FN assembly by VHL(-) cells is not due to a decreased a5b1
 integrin activity, further extending our previous observations
 (14) as well as those of
 others (13), showing that
 expression and activation of a5b1 on VHL(-) cells are normal.We also compared the ability of FN purified from the conditioned medium of
 VHL(+) and VHL(-) cells to assemble into fibrils. Our results confirmed that
 VHL(-) RCCs did not assemble a FN matrix, even in the presence of exogenous FN
 from VHL(+) cells (Fig.
 3B). In contrast, VHL(+) RCCs consistently formed a FN
 matrix when cultured either on FN purified from their own conditioned medium
 or from that of VHL(-) cells (Fig.
 3B). To discern between assembly of endogenous and
 exogenous FN, we used UMRC VHL(+) cells, because they barely produce FN, and
 hence they do not assemble unless we provide them with exogenous FN (see
 Fig. 2A). As shown in
 Fig. 3B, UMRC VHL(+)
 cells showed a similar assembly pattern when cultured on FN from VHL(+) or
 VHL(-) cells. Therefore, these results indicated that FN produced by VHL(-)
 cells does not interfere with normal FN function in VHL(+) cells.
 Additionally, they clearly established that FN secreted by VHL(-) cells is
 fully functional and able to be assembled by VHL(+) cells.VHL(-) Cells Are Unable to Trigger the FN Stretching Necessary
 for Its Assembly--We have previously shown that VHL(-) cells fail to
 assemble proper b1 fibrillar adhesions (FAs), a cell matrix adhesion
 structure essential for FN assembly
 (14). Therefore, the lack of
 proper formation of actin stress fibers and cell contraction could explain the
 defective assembly of FN by VHL(-) cells, because these events are required
 for the exposure of cryptic sites in FN and its progressive ordination into
 detergent-insoluble fibrils
 (33). To further analyze this
 process, we repeated our previous studies but now in the presence of exogenous
 FN to determine if VHL(-) cells were able to initialize the first steps of FN
 stretching required for its assembly into fibrils. After 4 h in culture, we
 analyzed by confocal microscopy the formation of focal contacts (FCs) by
 staining with paxillin, a major component of these structures, and with a FN
 antibody to see how FN was being stretched from these structures. Our results
 showed that VHL(+) cells arranged proper FCs, and the initial steps of fibril
 formation with short fibrils appearing at the edge of the FCs were very
 evident (Fig. 4A,
 panels c and d, white arrow-heads). In contrast, VHL(-)
 cells, although forming proper FCs, were not as efficient as VHL(+) cells, and
 the number of cells forming proper FCs were lower compared with VHL(+) cells
 (Fig. 4, A, panels
 f-h and B). These results strongly support our findings in that
 the impaired or defective formation of focal contacts may affect the proper
 formation of fibrillar adhesions required for FN assembly into fibrils. After
 24 h, these structures became more mature and organized elongated FAs, which
 colocalized with FN fibrils in VHL(+) cells
 (Fig. 4, panels j-l,
 see magnified area). On the contrary, and even in the presence of exogenous
 FN, VHL(-) cells failed to form FA structures as well as arranging FN into
 fibrils, (Fig. 4, panels
 n-p). These results and our previous observation of a diminished
 organization of actin stress fibers in VHL(-) cells
 (16) support the hypothesis
 that a decreased FN stretching could contribute to the lack of FN assembly in
 these cells.FIGURE 5.RhoA activation state in VHL(+) and (-) RCCs.
A, 786-O RCCs were cultured for 3-4 days in the absence or presence
 of the RhoA signaling inhibitor, Y27632 (5 mm) or the activator
 LPA (6 mm). FN matrix formation was analyzed by
 immunofluorescence experiments performed as described under
 "Experimental Procedures." B, 786-O VHL(+), VHL(-) cells
 and the mutant L188V (7 x 106) were incubated for 3 h in
 serum-free medium, and this was considered as time 0 for basal levels of RhoA
 activity. Cells were then maintained in culture in complete medium for an
 additional period of 24, 48, and 72 h. After each time point, cells were
 lysed, and the lysates were incubated overnight with C21-GST. Bound and total
 RhoA were analyzed by Western blot using an anti-RhoA mAb; VHL(+) (gray
 bars), VHL(-) (black bars), and L188V (striped bars)
 bound versus total are represented; a representative experiment is
 shown, and the average of three different experiments of VHL(+) and VHL(-) is
 represented; *, p <= 0.05.FIGURE 6.Effect of expressing a recombinant dominant negative or constitutively
 active RhoA in VHL(+) and (-) cells. A, 786-O cells
 were infected with a retroviral vector expressing GFP alone or with a
 constitutively active (RhoA-Q63L) mutant. One week after infection, 786-O
 cells were grown to confluence and changes in cell morphology were analyzed
 with a phase contrast microscope. The scale bar represents 50 mm.
 B, FN matrix formation by 786-O VHL(+) and VHL(-) cells infected with
 a retroviral vector expressing GFP alone or with a dominant negative (RhoA
 N19) or a constitutively active (RhoA Q63L) mutants, respectively, was
 analyzed by indirect immunofluorescence. Cells (2 x 105
 cells) were grown for 3-4 days at 37 degC and 5% CO2, and the FN
 matrix was detected with a polyclonal anti-FN antibody. Quantification of FN
 assembly recovery in VHL(-) cells with RhoA Q63L is also represented.
 Error bars represent the standard deviation of at least three
 independent experiments.Activation of the Small GTPase RhoA Is Defective in VHL(-)
 Cells--It is well established that the GTP-binding protein RhoA
 mediates the formation of actin stress fibers and regulates cellular functions
 such as cell adhesion and contractility
 (42). Furthermore, inhibitors
 of RhoA-mediated cellular contractility prevent FN assembly into fibrils
 (32), and a constitutively
 active form of RhoA restores the assembly of FN into fibrils in cells lacking
 active b1 integrins (43).
 Accordingly, we hypothesized that RhoA activation and/or function could be
 defective in VHL(-) cells.FIGURE 7.Analysis of p190RhoGAP phosphorylation state in VHL(+) and
 VHL(-) RCCs. 786-O, VHL(+) and (-) cells (top panel), the
 mutant L188V (medium panel), and RCC4 VHL(+) and (-) cells
 (bottom panel) were grown for 72 h in complete medium, then
 serum-starved for 3 h and p190RhoGAP was immunoprecipitated from cell lysates
 (7 x 106 cells). Total p190RhoGAP constitutive expression was
 analyzed by Western blot using a specific anti-p190RhoGAP mAb, and
 phosphorylated p190RhoGAP was measured with the anti-phosphotyrosine mAb PY20.
 Phospho-p190RhoGAP versus total p190RhoGAP is represented. A
 representative experiment of several performed is shown.To determine whether RhoA was directly involved in FN matrix assembly in
 RCC, we first performed immunofluorescence experiments to analyze the assembly
 of FN by 786-O VHL(+) and VHL(-) RCCs in the presence of inhibitors or
 activators of the RhoA signaling pathway. In the presence of Y-27632 or
 2-3-BDM, inhibitors of RhoA downstream effectors, we found that the assembly
 of FN was completely abolished in VHL(+) cells
 (Fig. 5A and data not
 shown). Interestingly, stimulation of RhoA by LPA resulted in increased FN
 fibril formation in VHL(+) cell cultures and induction of a few FN fibrils by
 VHL(-) cells (Fig.
 5A). We next performed RhoA activity assays using the
 C21-GST fusion protein. We evaluated RhoA activity in a time course from 0 to
 72 h in culture. As shown in Fig.
 5B, the RCC cell line 786-O stably expressing wild-type
 pVHL showed a basal RhoA activity, which progressively increased over time. In
 contrast, 786-O VHL(-) cells and the VHL mutant L188V, had a very low basal
 RhoA activity that did not increase over time
 (Fig. 5B). Similar
 results were obtained for the RCC4 cell line, which displayed higher levels of
 active RhoA in VHL(+) compared with VHL(-) cells (supplemental Fig. S1). These
 results suggested that the RhoA signaling pathway was playing a role in the
 functional alterations observed on these VHL(-) cells. Furthermore, the
 results with the type 2C mutants, which retained the ability to regulate HIF
 as the VHL wild type, indicated that RhoA activity in these cells seems to be
 independent of HIF.Constitutive Activation of RhoA Stimulates FN Assembly by
 VHL(-) Cells--To obtain further evidence for the
 involvement of RhoA in the lack of FN assembly in VHL(-) cells, we introduced
 a constitutively active (GFP RhoA-Q63L) or a dominant negative (GFP RhoA-N19)
 recombinant RhoA form in VHL(-) and VHL(+) cells, respectively. The expression
 of RhoA was increased at least three times (supplemental Fig. S2). Three days
 after infection, we analyzed changes on cell morphology and observed that
 infection of VHL(+) cells with GFP RhoA-N19 did not induce phenotypic
 alterations (data not shown). In contrast, infection of VHL(-) cells with GFP
 RhoA-Q63L, induced an epithelial cytoarchitecture that resembled that of
 VHL(+) cells. Cell dimensions changed from 70 +- 5-mm length and
 20-mm width to 35 +- 10-mm length and 20-mm width after
 infection with RhoA-Q63L, whereas infection with the empty vector did not have
 any effect (Fig. 6A).
 We next analyzed whether infection with these mutants induced alterations in
 the assembly of FN. Immunofluorescence experiments with VHL(+)/GFP RhoA-N19
 cells revealed a decrease of FN fibrils when compared with the control VHL(+)
 cells or with cells infected with the empty vector
 (Fig. 6B,
 top). The GFP RhoA-Q63L mutant did not increase the constitutive FN
 matrix assembly observed on VHL(+) (data not shown). In contrast, infection of
 VHL(-) cells with GFP RhoA-Q63L stimulated the assembly of FN into fibrils,
 with a recovery of at least 39% with respect to that observed in VHL(+) cells.
 However, infection with the empty vector had no effect
 (Fig. 6B,
 bottom). Altogether, these results further supported the conclusion
 that the inability of VHL(-) cells to properly assemble a FN matrix is due, at
 least in part, to an impaired activation of RhoA.Down-regulation of RhoA Activity in VHL(-) RCC Cells
 Correlates with Increased p190RhoGAP
 Phosphorylation--Down-regulation of RhoA activity has been
 correlated with activation of GTPase-activating proteins such as p190RhoGAP
 (44). Therefore, we asked
 whether the decreased RhoA activity encountered in VHL(-) cells was due to an
 increased activation of p190RhoGAP. To this end, p190RhoGAP was
 immunoprecipitated from cell lysates, and tyrosine phosphorylation levels were
 analyzed. Fig. 7 shows that
 phosphorylated p190RhoGAP was increased in VHL(-) cells and in the L188V
 mutant (2.3 +- 0.3- and 2.4 +- 0.5-fold, respectively) derived
 from 786-O cell lines, and 2.35 +- 0.25-fold in VHL(-) cells derived
 from RCC4 cell lines, with respect to their counterparts stably expressing
 wild-type pVHL VHL(+) (Fig. 7,
 top, middle, and bottom panels). These results indicated
 that the enhanced phosphorylation of p190RhoGAP in VHL(-) cells may explain
 the decreased RhoA activity in these cells.FIGURE 8.Effect of gene-silencing p190RhoGAP on VHL(-) cells assembly of
 FN. A, silencing of p190RhoGAP was achieved by transfecting 786
 VHL(-) cells with a specific siRNA (at the indicated concentrations). The
 level of silencing was verified by immunoblotting with an anti-p190RhoGAP
 antibody 3 days after cell transfection. B, FN matrix formation by
 786 VHL(-) cells transfected with scramble (scr) RNA or with siRNA to
 p190RhoGAP (100 nm) was analyzed by indirect immunofluorescence
 using a polyclonal anti-FN antibody, and quantification of FN assembly
 recovery is represented. C, RhoA activity in 786 VHL(-) cells
 transfected with scramble RNA or with siRNA to p190RhoGAP was determined by a
 RhoGELISA assay.Gene Silencing p190RhoGAP in VHL(-) Cells Partially Restores
 the Assembly of FN--Because increased activation of p190RhoGAP
 correlated with decreased RhoA activity in VHL(-) cells, we next addressed the
 importance of this protein in the assembly of FN. To this aim, we silenced
 p190RhoGAP expression in VHL(-) cells, and then tested their capability to
 form FN fibrils. We achieved an 85-95% interference detected by immunoblotting
 (Fig. 8A). Silencing
 p190RhoGAP partially restored the ability of VHL(-) cells to form FN fibrils,
 with a 39% of recovery (Fig.
 8B), and the resulting pattern was similar to that
 observed for (Q63L)RhoA-transfected VHL(-) cells. We also tested whether this
 effect was due to increased RhoA activity. We found that VHL(-) cells
 transfected with siRNA to p190RhoGAP showed increased RhoA activity (1.7
 +- 0.15-fold) compared with cells transfected with scramble siRNA
 (Fig. 8C).

DISCUSSIONIn VHL(-) RCC cells, the lack of FN assembly has been shown to promote and
 maintain tumor angiogenesis allowing vessels to infiltrate tumors
 (27). Considering that
 regulation of FN assembly by pVHL seems to be essential for its tumor
 suppressor function (27), the
 aim of our studies was to understand why VHL(-) RCC cells fail to form a
 proper extracellular matrix. An altered integrin expression/function or
 insufficient FN synthesis could account for this defect. However, we
 previously demonstrated (14)
 that integrin expression or function did not significantly differ in VHL(+) or
 VHL(-) cells, and in this work we confirm that FN production did not correlate
 with its assembly. With respect to this, some RCC tumors accumulated FN in the
 tumor cell cytoplasm, and little or none in the stroma
 (41), suggesting a defective
 transport and secretion of FN that could account for the lack of FN assembly
 by these cells. However, our previous results using cultured cells showed no
 evidence of intracellular accumulation of FN
 (14). Additionally, recent
 studies have demonstrated that VHL(-) cells maintain the ability to secrete FN
 (27). These findings support
 our present results showing that the levels of FN produced by VHL(-) cells are
 apparently independent of its ability to assemble into a matrix.Thus, other possibilities have to be considered regarding the regulation of
 FN assembly by pVHL. First, it has been proposed that VHL interaction with FN
 might be necessary for FN matrix assembly
 (26,
 40,
 45). A direct interaction
 between pVHL and collagen IV was recently reported
 (46,
 47), indicating that the role
 of pVHL in the remodeling of extracellular matrix components is not exclusive
 for FN. Kurban et al.
 (47) also demonstrated that
 the pVHL/collagen interaction seems to be necessary for collagen assembly into
 fibrils. However, it remains unclear how pVHL mediates this process, although
 these authors demonstrate that the effect of pVHL on the regulation of
 collagen assembly is independent of its ligase activity. With respect to FN,
 and given the role of pVHL in proteasomal-mediated degradation, pVHL could be
 involved in the removal of abnormally processed FN molecules; thus, regulating
 FN at the post-transcriptional level. Although this is still a possibility
 Kurban et al. also showed that the pVHL-FN interaction is indirect;
 hence it could be in fact mediated through collagen IV. Therefore, although a
 direct or indirect pVHL-FN interaction might be important, it may not always
 be sufficient to support FN assembly.A second possibility is that pVHL indirectly regulates FN assembly by
 regulating other extracellular proteins that degrade this matrix. In this
 respect, it has been proposed that extracellular FN in VHL(-) cells is
 degraded by the increased activation of metalloproteinases such as MMP-2
 (27). This possibility agrees
 with the fact that increased expression of MMPs is a consequence of pVHL loss
 of function (7,
 48). Finally, and considering
 our present results in which VHL(-) cells were unable to assemble exogenously
 added FN produced by VHL(+), we can suggest that additional functional defects
 associated with the lack of VHL and different from FN itself might also be
 taking part in this process. Therefore, in this report, we analyzed the
 possibility that intracellular events such as cytoskeleton reorganization and
 cell contractility might be regulating the assembly of FN in VHL(+) cells. In
 this regard, VHL(-) cells do not form proper structures related to
 cytoskeleton organization and cell contractility
 (8,
 14,
 16). These facts support our
 present observations showing that VHL(-) cells plated on exogenously added FN
 were unable to make the initial FN stretching necessary for its assembly. This
 process might be partly caused by a deficient activation of the small GTPase
 RhoA in these cells. Because RhoA is an important regulator of cell
 cytoskeleton organization
 (42), the altered activity of
 this GTPase in VHL(-) cells may also account for the fibroblastoid phenotype
 observed in VHL(-) cells. This phenotype, also caused by the lack of proper
 cell-cell adhesion structures
 (16), may also contribute to
 the lack of matrix assembly in these cells. In this respect, we clearly show
 that VHL(-) cells have a deficient RhoA activity, probably due to increased
 activity of the RhoA inhibitor p190RhoGAP. This was also supported by our
 results in which we partially restored the ability to form FN fibrils in
 VHL(-) cells, in which we silenced the p190RhoGAP gene. Besides these results,
 no relationship between pVHL and Rho-GTPases has been established to date, and
 thus it is still unclear how pVHL regulates this process. One possibility is
 that pVHL regulates Rho-GTPases indirectly, through a second VHL-interacting
 protein. For example, pVHL interacts with several atypical PKCs
 (49,
 50) and may regulate its
 cellular activity in certain cases (Okuda and co-workers, Ref.
 8). Atypical PKCs have been
 involved in the regulation of the GTPase RhoA activity
 (51-53).
 Moreover, PKC-d was shown to interact with p190RhoGAP in endothelial
 cells (54). It is therefore
 possible that pVHL interaction with atypical PKCs regulates the activity of
 Rho-GTPases by modulating the phosphorylation state of RhoA inhibitors (GDI,
 p190RhoGAP) or activators (GEF). This hypothesis would be in agreement with
 our present results showing an increased p190Rho-GAP phosphorylation in VHL(-)
 cells. Another remaining question would be how decreased RhoA activity in
 VHL(-) cells may account for their phenotypic changes and contribute to
 tumorigenesis. It is well known that Rho GTPases have been involved in the
 pathology of various human diseases including cancer
 (55), and interfering RhoA
 activation via p190RhoGAP leads to melanoma cell migration
 (56). Therefore, it is
 reasonable to think that decreased Rho GTPase activity may be also involved in
 the pathogenesis of renal carcinomas.In summary, our present study demonstrates that FN production and function
 are not deficient in VHL(-) cells but rather that altered intracellular
 signals regulating cell contractility contributes to the inability of these
 cells to assemble an FN matrix. Furthermore, our results with type 2C mutants
 indicated that these mechanisms are independent of HIF. Thus, we provide a
 mechanism that explains some of the defects in extracellular matrix assembly
 observed in VHL(-) cells. The precise role of pVHL in this mechanism and
 whether this is a general mechanism in other cell lines remains to be
 established.

Supplementary Material
[Supplemental Data]
