[Abstract, Methods, Mixed]

A genome-wide association study identifies susceptibility loci for Wilms tumor. Wilms tumor is the most common renal malignancy of childhood. To identify common variants that confer susceptibility to Wilms tumor we conducted a genome-wide association study in 757 cases and 1,879 controls. We evaluated ten SNPs in regions significant at P<5x10-5 in two independent replication series from the UK (769 cases and 2,814 controls) and the US (719 cases and 1,037 controls). We identified clear significant associations at two loci, 2p24 (rs3755132, P=1.03x10-14 and rs807624, P=1.32x10-14) and 11q14 (rs790356, P=4.25 x10-15). Both regions contain genes that are plausibly related to Wilms tumorigenesis. We also identified candidate signals at 5q14, 22q12 and Xp22.

METHODS
Samples
Cases
Wilms tumor cases from UK were recruited from Paediatric Oncology centres through the Factors Associated with Childhood Tumors (FACT) study and the Children's Cancer and Leukaemia Group (CCLG, Supplementary Note). From 1985 onwards, 97% of children in the UK with Wilms tumour have been registered with the CCLG (formerly called the UKCCSG, ). Phenotypic data was obtained from the referring centre and/or the National Registry of Childhood Tumors (NRCT). Wilms tumor cases from North America were recruited through the National Wilms Tumor Study Group (NWTSG) and the Children's Oncology Group (COG). Since 1969, the NWTSG has registered over 80% of incident cases of Wilms tumor.14 Cases were unrelated and self-reported to be of non-Hispanic European ancestry. Information regarding race, gender, age at diagnosis, stage, histopathology, relapse, bilaterality and family history of Wilms tumor was obtained for as many cases as possible.
Controls
DNA samples from UK controls were from the 1958 Birth Cohort, an ongoing follow-up of persons born in Great Britain in one week in 1958. 2,814 population controls, representative of the geographical regions across the UK, were used in the replication study.
We did not have samples from North American controls. Instead we used data from the Database of Genotypes and Phenotypes (dbGaP). Bethesda (MD): National Center for Biotechnology Information, National Library of Medicine.6 In the GWAS we used data from individuals recruited as controls for a study of Parkinson's disease at the NeuroGenetics Research Consortium (NGRC)-affiliated movement disorder clinics in Oregon, Washington, Georgia and New York. Individuals were age >20, of self-reported white ethnicity and free of neurological diseases. In the replication study, we used controls recruited through being friends/spouses of attendees of patients at M.D. Anderson Cancer Centre, Texas. Individuals were described as non-Hispanic Caucasian and had not had cancer.
The study had approval from the appropriate ethics and study committees in the UK (London Multicentre Ethics Committee, Ref, 05/MRE02/17) and US (Children's Oncology Group, Ref: AREN09B1).
Genotyping
For the GWAS, cases were genotyped using the Illumina HumanOmniExpress-12v1_A SNP array at the Broad Institute Genetic Analysis Platform. Each 96-well plate contained a HapMap CEU control. Samples were clustered and called from intensity data using BeadStudio version 3.1.3.0 with genotyping module version 3.2.32. Genotypes for the 1,879 controls used in the GWAS were generated using the Illumina Omni 1M array as part of the CIDR: NGRC Parkinson's Disease Study.
For the replication of associations we used 5'exonuclease assays (Taqman(tm), Applied Biosystems) following manufacturer's protocols. We combined cases with controls on 384-well plates, each of which included at least two negative controls and 1-2% duplicates (intra-platform concordance: 98.96%). We performed cross-platform validation, genotyping by Taqman all case samples that had been run on the Illumina array (cross-platform concordance: 99.11%). US replication genotypes were compared to those available from 1,037 US controls, which had been genotyped on the Illumina Omni 1M array as part of the High Density SNP Association Analysis of Melanoma study.
For rs2283873 at 22q12, the genotype frequencies were in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (HWE) in the GWAS but there was some deviation from HWE in the replication analyses (Supplementary Table 2). We therefore undertook direct Sanger sequencing of rs2283873 to validate the Taqman data and to confirm genotypes of 257 samples, including all those heterozygous or homozygous for the minor allele or that had failed Taqman replication. There was full concordancy between genotype calls determined by Taqman and sequencing, thus confirming the validity of the replication genotyping.
Inclusion criteria for analyses
We only included cases with a definite histological diagnosis of Wilms tumor; we excluded individuals with histological diagnoses of nephroblastomatosis, renal cell carcinoma, renal sarcoma, rhabdoid tumor and peripheral PNET. We restricted analyses to individuals that were called on >97% of successfully genotyped SNPs. We computed identity-by-state (IBS) probabilities for all pairs in order to identify cryptic duplicates and close relatives (IBS>0.80). For each pair, the sample with the highest genotype call rate was retained: we thus eliminated two cases, one from a pair of close relatives (IBS= 0.82) and one from a pair of duplicated samples (IBS>0.99). Using a subset of 65,045 uncorrelated SNPs (r2<0.1), we estimated the average IBS between all participants together with the phase II HapMap samples (90 western European (CEU), 90 Nigerian (YRI), 44 Japanese (JPT) and 45 Han Chinese (CHB)). Using multi-dimensional scaling, we identified and removed 42 cases with >15% non-Western-European ancestry (27 with African ancestry and 15 with Asian ancestry). Furthermore, we excluded samples with abnormal heterozygosity (>5SD from the mean heterozygosity: one case sample eliminated). Following these exclusions, 757 cases and 1,879 controls were available for the genome-wide analysis.
For the GWAS, we included the 696,780 SNPs that were successfully genotyped in cases and controls. We filtered out all SNPs in either cases or controls with a) a MAF<1%, b) a call rate of <95% in cases or controls or c) a minor frequency of 1-5% with a call rate of <99%. We also excluded SNPs whose genotyped frequency departed from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (HWE) at P<10-12 in cases or P<0.00001 in controls (male samples were excluded for evaluation of HWE for X-chromosome SNPs). We excluded synonymous (G-C and A-T) SNPs. Following these exclusions, we analysed 599,255 SNPs genotyped in cases and controls. Cluster plots were inspected manually for all SNPs considered for replication.
For the replication, call rates of at least 97% per 384-well plate were required and cluster plots were visually examined for each plate. Genotype distributions for each SNP were evaluated for deviation from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium.
Statistical Methods
For the GWAS, we assessed associations between each SNP and disease primarily using the 1df Cochran-Armitage trend test; as a secondary measure of association, we performed the 1df allelic association test. Inflation in the chi-squared statistic was assessed using the genomic control approach: we derived an inflation factor (l) by dividing the median of the lowest 90% of the 1df statistics by the 45% percentile of a 1df chi-squared distribution (0.357). Since l was small, we chose to present p-values uncorrected for l as this made little difference to the significance levels and preserved consistency with the replication analysis.
We selected 20 SNPs that demonstrated association of a significance level of P<5x10-5 based on the 1-d.f. trend test in the GWAS for the replication phase. Where two or more SNPs were selected from the same region, we used multiple logistic regression to determine a minimal set of SNPs that showed evidence of association after adjustment for other SNPs.
1df tests of association were performed for the GWAS and the US and UK replication analyses separately, and then for the combined data, (stratified by stage (i.e. GWAS or replication) and study group (US or UK)). For the principle association analysis, we have emphasized the OR estimates from the combined replication analysis (stratified by study) to minimize the effect of 'winner's curse'. We assessed each SNP for dose-response by comparing 1df and 2df logistic regression models, adjusting for stage, using a likelihood ratio test (P<0.01) and examined the combined effects of multiple SNPs by evaluating the effect on the model of adding an interaction term, using a likelihood ratio test (P<0.01) and adjusting for stage.
Modification of the per allele odds ratios by covariate phenotype/risk factors was assessed using analysis of cases against all controls to generate strata-specific ORs and using case-only analysis to examine for heterogeneity of effect (Supplementary Table 6). Tumors defined as stage III or stage IV were categorised as "advanced"; tumors defined as stage I or stage II as "non-advanced"; bilateral tumours, which are usually termed 'Stage V', were excluded from this analysis. Tumors with histology described as "high-risk-blastemal", "high-risk diffuse anaplasia" or "unfavourable" were categorised as "high risk"; tumors with histology described as "blastemal", "cystic", "intermediate", "triphasic", "favourable", "intermediate-focal anaplasia" or "intermediate-non-anaplastic" were categorised as "standard risk". Age of diagnosis was analysed in three categories: <2 years, 2-4 years and >4 years and the effect of age at diagnosis on SNP genotype in the cases was analysed using ordered polytomous regression.
Imputation was performed using IMPUTE2 using data from HapMap3 (~1.5 million SNPs, 1,184 individuals) and the 1000 Genomes low-coverage pilot haplotypes (179 individuals) as a framework. Imputed SNPs were retained only if they had an information score of >0.8 and a certainty score of >0.95 in both cases and controls. Haplotypes were evaluated using SNPs in each region that were significantly associated with Wilms tumour at P<0.001, after eliminating perfectly correlated SNPs. For haplotypes of frequency >1% (in controls), the p-value for association for the haplotype was calculated. The CaTS - Power Calculator software was used to estimate the power to detect each of the associations found, . LD matrices between SNPs reported in HapMap were based on Data Release 27/phase II+III Feb09 on NCBI B36 assembly, dbSNP b126, viewed using Haploview software (v4.2). LD blocks were evaluated using the HapMap recombination rate (cM/Mb) and defined using the Oxford recombination hotspots.15
All genomic references are based on NCBI Build 36. Analyses were performed using R (v2.6), Stata10 (State College, Texas, US) and PLINK (v1.07) software.

Supplementary Material
1
