[Abstract, Results, Discussion, Methods]

Antipsychotic agent thioridazine sensitizes renal carcinoma Caki cells to TRAIL-induced apoptosis through reactive oxygen species-mediated inhibition of Akt signaling and downregulation of Mcl-1 and c-FLIP(L). Thioridazine has been known as an antipsychotic agent, but it also has anticancer activity. However, the effect of thioridazine on tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) sensitization has not yet been studied. Here, we investigated the ability of thioridazine to sensitize TRAIL-mediated apoptosis. Combined treatment with thioridazine and TRAIL markedly induced apoptosis in various human carcinoma cells, including renal carcinoma (Caki, ACHN, and A498), breast carcinoma (MDA-MB231), and glioma (U251MG) cells, but not in normal mouse kidney cells (TMCK-1) and human normal mesangial cells. We found that thioridazine downregulated c-FLIP(L) and Mcl-1 expression at the post-translational level via an increase in proteasome activity. The overexpression of c-FLIP(L) and Mcl-1 overcame thioridazine plus TRAIL-induced apoptosis. We further observed that thioridazine inhibited the Akt signaling pathway. In contrast, although other phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase/Akt inhibitors (LY294002 and wortmannin) sensitized TRAIL-mediated apoptosis, c-FLIP(L) and Mcl-1 expressions were not altered. Furthermore, thioridazine increased the production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in Caki cells, and ROS scavengers (N-acetylcysteine, glutathione ethyl ester, and trolox) inhibited thioridazine plus TRAIL-induced apoptosis, as well as Akt inhibition and the downregulation of c-FLIP(L) and Mcl-1. Collectively, our study demonstrates that thioridazine enhances TRAIL-mediated apoptosis via the ROS-mediated inhibition of Akt signaling and the downregulation of c-FLIP(L) and Mcl-1 at the post-translational level.

Results
Thioridazine sensitizes to TRAIL-mediated apoptosis in human renal carcinoma, breast carcinoma, and glioma cells, but not normal cells
Thioridazine has anticancer effects on multiple cancer cells.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 Therefore, we investigated the ability of thioridazine to sensitize human renal carcinoma Caki cells to TRAIL. To determine whether thioridazine plus TRAIL induce apoptosis, an FACS analysis to measure the DNA content and western blotting to detect the cleavage of PARP, a substrate of caspase-3, were performed. Thioridazine or TRAIL did not affect apoptosis, but a combined treatment with thioridazine plus TRAIL markedly increased the sub-G1 population and PARP cleavage (Figure 1a). In addition, thioridazine plus TRAIL induced chromatin damage in the nuclei (Figure 1b) and cytoplasmic histone-associated DNA fragments (Figure 1c). Combined treatment with thioridazine and TRAIL increased caspase-3 activation (Figure 1d), and z-VAD-fmk (z-VAD), a pan-caspase inhibitor, markedly inhibited thioridazine plus TRAIL-induced apoptosis (Figure 1e, upper panel). The cleavage of PARP and caspase-3 was also blocked by z-VAD treatment (Figure 1e, lower panel). To identify the mechanisms underlying sensitization to TRAIL by thioridazine, we examined the expression levels of apoptosis-related proteins, including the Bcl-2 family, IAP family, constituents of DISC (FADD and cellular FLICE-inhibitory protein (c-FLIP(L)), and DRs in thioridazine-treated Caki cells. Thioridazine markedly downregulated c-FLIP(L) and Mcl-1 expression, but the expression of other proteins remained unchanged (Figure 1f). These results indicate that thioridazine sensitizes Caki cells to TRAIL-mediated apoptosis.
Next, we used other human renal carcinoma (ACHN and A498), human breast carcinoma (MDA-MB231), and human glioma (U251MG) cells to investigate the anticancer effect of thioridazine on other carcinoma cells. As shown in Figure 2a, combined treatment with thioridazine plus TRAIL induced apoptosis and PARP cleavage in ACHN, A498, MDA-MB231, and U251MG cells. In contrast, thioridazine plus TRAIL induced neither cellular shrinkage nor apoptosis in normal cells (mouse kidney cells (TMCK-1) and human mesangial cells), whereas cellular shrinkage and blebbing was detected in Caki cells (Figure 2b). Furthermore, thioridazine induced the downregulation of c-FLIP(L) and Mcl-1 expression in carcinoma cells, but not in normal cells (Figure 2c). These data indicate that thioridazine can sensitize cancer cells other than Caki cells to TRAIL.
c-FLIP(L) and Mcl-1 are downregulated at the post-translational levels in thioridazine-treated Caki cells
Because thioridazine induced the downregulation of c-FLIP(L) and Mcl-1 expression (Figure 1f), we investigated how thioridazine inhibits c-FLIP(L) and Mcl-1 protein expression. Thioridazine inhibited c-FLIP(L) and Mcl-1 expression within 3 h and then gradually reduced their levels further until the 24-h time point (Figure 3a, upper panel). However, we found that the mRNA expressions of c-FLIP(L) and Mcl-1 were not changed in thioridazine-treated Caki cells (Figure 3a, lower panel). Therefore, we examined the ability of thioridazine to modulate the protein stabilities of c-FLIP(L) and Mcl-1. Caki cells were treated with cyclohexamide (CHX), an inhibitor of de novo protein synthesis, or CHX plus thioridazine. Although treatment with CHX alone downregulated c-FLIP(L) and Mcl-1 expressions, combined treatment with CHX and thioridazine more markedly reduced c-FLIP(L) and Mcl-1 expressions (Figure 3b). These data suggested that thioridazine downregulated both c-FLIP(L) and Mcl-1 expressions at the post-translational level.
We treated c-FLIP(L)- or Mcl-1-overexpressing Caki cells with TRAIL in the absence or presence of thioridazine. Although combined treatment with thioridazine plus TRAIL increased the sub-G1 population and induced PARP cleavage in Caki/vector cells, thioridazine plus TRAIL did not induce apoptosis in Caki/c-FLIP(L) and Caki/Mcl-1 cells (Figures 3c and d). These data indicate that the downregulation of c-FLIP(L) and Mcl-1 is important to thioridazine-mediated TRAIL sensitization.
Thioridazine-induced proteasome activity is associated with downregulation of c-FLIP(L) and Mcl-1 expression
Previous studies reported that c-FLIP(L) and Mcl-1 are degraded by the proteasome-ubiquitin system.21, 22 Therefore, we investigated whether the downregulation of c-FLIP(L) and Mcl-1 is associated with proteasome activity. First, we examined the ability of proteasome inhibitors (MG132 and lactacystin) to reverse the thioridazine-mediated downregulation of c-FLIP(L) and Mcl-1 expression. As shown in Figure 4a, proteasome inhibitors blocked the downregulation of c-FLIP(L) and Mcl-1 expression. Next, we measured the chymotrypsin-like activity of proteasome with Suc-Leu-Leu-Val-Tyr-AMC as the proteasome substrate to investigate the ability of thioridazine to increase proteasome activity. As expected, thioridazine increased the chymotrypsin-like activity of the proteasome within 12 h (Figure 4b). We used the proteasome sensor vector, ZsProSensor-1, to confirm the induction of proteasome activity by thioridazine. The vector encodes a destabilized green fluorescence protein (ZsGreen), which is rapidly degraded by proteasomes. For example, when proteasomes are inhibited, the fluorescent protein accumulates, which allows green fluorescence to be detected by fluorescence microscopy. Importantly, thioridazine decreased green fluorescence, whereas MG132 increased green fluorescence (Figure 4c). We further examined the ability of thioridazine to modulate the protein expression of two critical proteasome subunits: 20S proteasome subunit alpha type 5 (PSMA5) and 19S proteasome non-ATPase regulatory subunit 4 (PSMD4/S5a).23 However, the increase in the proteasome activity was not associated with PSMA5 and PSMD4/S5a expression in thioridazine-treated Caki cells. Next, we investigated the importance of the downregulation of c-FLIP(L) and Mcl-1 due to proteasome activation to thioridazine plus TRAIL-mediated apoptosis. When proteasome inhibitors (MG132 and lactacystin) reversed the downregulation of c-FLIP(L) and Mcl-1, the sub-G1 population and PARP cleavage were markedly inhibited in thioridazine plus TRAIL-treated cells (Figure 4e). These data suggest that the downregulation of c-FLIP(L) and Mcl-1 expression due to the induction of proteasome activity is critical in thioridazine plus TRAIL-mediated apoptosis.
Inhibition of Akt signaling is involved in thioridazine-mediated TRAIL sensitization
Thioridazine has been known to exert anticancer effects via the inhibition of the PI3K/Akt signaling pathways.5, 6 To examine the involvement of the PI3K/Akt pathway in thioridazine-mediated TRAIL sensitization, we tested the effect of PI3K/Akt inhibitors (LY294002 and wortmannin) on c-FLIP(L) and Mcl-1 expression. Although LY294002 and wortmannin, similar to thioridazine, markedly inhibited Akt phosphorylation within 3 h, LY294002 and wortmannin did not reduce the c-FLIP(L) and Mcl-1 expression levels (Figure 5a). The present study demonstrates that thioridazine, unlike LY294002 and wortmannin, exhibits an additional activity in downregulating c-FLIP(L) and Mcl-1 expression beyond the inhibition of Akt signaling. Therefore, we hypothesized that thioridazine could be a stronger TRAIL sensitizer than LY294002 and wortmannin. Our data indicated that the increased sensitivity to TRAIL-mediated apoptosis was most pronounced in thioridazine-treated cells (Figure 5b). These data collectively suggest that thioridazine, via the downregulation of c-FLIP(L) and Mcl-1 expression, could serve as a more effective agent to induce TRAIL-mediated apoptosis.
Thioridazine increased ROS production
The effect of thioridazine on reactive oxygen species (ROS) production is controversial. Thioridazine increased the levels of ROS in myelin and mitochondria in rats,24 but also had antioxidant activity via an interaction with the inner membrane of mitochondria in rat liver mitochondria.25 We examined the ability of thioridazine to increase ROS production in Caki cells. As shown in Figures 6a and b, thioridazine markedly induced intracellular ROS production, and pretreatment with ROS scavengers (N-acetyl-L-cysteine (NAC), glutathione ethyl ester (GEE), and trolox) inhibited the increase in the sub-G1 population and PARP cleavage in thioridazine plus TRAIL-treated cells. Furthermore, all ROS scavengers reversed the downregulation of c-FLIP(L) and Mcl-1 and prevented the inhibition of Akt phosphorylation in thioridazine plus TRAIL-mediated cells. As shown in Figures 3 and 4, both c-FLIP(L) and Mcl-1 expression were downregulated at the post-translational levels via a proteasome degradation pathway. Therefore, Caki cells were pretreated with ROS scavengers followed by the addition of thioridazine to further examine the association between ROS and the induction of thioridazine-mediated proteasome activity. As predicted, ROS scavengers markedly inhibited proteasome activity. These data indicate that thioridazine downregulated c-FLIP(L) and Mcl-1 expression via an increase in ROS-mediated proteasome activity.
Taken together, our results demonstrate that thioridazine sensitizes cells to TRAIL-induced apoptosis via the ROS-mediated inhibition of Akt signaling and downregulation of Mcl-1 and c-FLIP(L) at the post-translational levels.

Discussion
In this study, we demonstrated the mechanism that underlies the sensitization to TRAIL-mediated apoptosis due to thioridazine. Thioridazine induced the downregulation of c-FLIP(L) and Mcl-1 expressions at the post-translational levels via the upregulation of proteasome activity and decreased Akt phosphorylation. In addition, thioridazine increased intracellular ROS production, which is associated with the induction of proteasome activity and inhibition of Akt signaling. Therefore, our results suggest that thioridazine increased TRAIL-mediated apoptosis via the ROS-mediated inhibition of Akt signaling and downregulation of Mcl-1 and c-FLIP(L) (Figure 6d). These findings support that thioridazine could be an attractive drug for TRAIL sensitization.
Thioridazine is well known to exert anticancer effects via the inhibition of the PI3K/Akt singling pathway.5, 6 Previous studies reported that PI3K/Akt activation protected human leukemia HL60 cells from TRAIL-mediated apoptosis,26 and the inhibition of PI3K/Akt augmented TRAIL sensitization in human leukemia,27 neuroblastoma,28 and colon cancer cells.29 In our study, thioridazine also inhibited Akt phosphorylation (Figure 5a). Previous studies reported that the PI3K/Akt signaling pathway is associated with c-FLIP(L) and Mcl-1 expression in murine B lymphocytes and ovarian cancer cells, respectively.30, 31 In addition, PI3K/Akt modulates c-FLIP(L) and Mcl-1 protein stability. Moumen et al.32 reported that PI3K/Akt maintains c-FLIP(L) protein stability via Met signaling in hepatocytes, and granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor enhances Mcl-1 stability via the activation of PI3K/Akt in neutrophils.33 However, other PI3K/Akt inhibitors (LY294002 and wortmannin) did not affect or downregulate c-FLIP(L) and Mcl-1 expression (Figure 5a) or the induction of proteasome activity (data not shown). The thioridazine-mediated downregulation of c-FLIP(L) and Mcl-1 expression is probably independent of PI3K/Akt signaling in human renal carcinoma Caki cells (Figure 5). Thus, thioridazine likely acts as a stronger sensitizer than LY294002 and wortmannin (Figure 5b).
ROS are important signaling molecules that modulate cellular responses. Thioridazine markedly increased ROS production (Figure 6a), and ROS was associated with thioridazine plus TRAIL-mediated apoptosis (Figure 6b). Furthermore, we detected that ROS modulated the downregulation of c-FLIP(L) and Mcl-1 expression (Figure 6b). According to previous reports, ROS have dual positive and negative functions on proteasome activity. In neutrophils and hepatocytes, ROS inhibited proteasome activity.34, 35 In contrast, ROS increased proteasome activity in skeletal muscle myotubes and lens epithelial cells.36, 37 In our study, the induction of proteasome activity by thioridazine depended on ROS production, and ROS scavengers reversed thioridazine-mediated c-FLIP(L) and Mcl-1 downregulation (Figure 6b). However, the mechanism by which thioridazine modulates proteasome activity is unclear. We examined the effect of thioridazine on the protein expression of two critical proteasome subunits: PSMA5 and PSMD4/S5a.23 However, thioridazine did not alter either protein (Figure 4d). Therefore, the mechanism by which thioridazine modulates proteasome activity requires further evaluation.
Taken together, our results suggest that thioridazine sensitizes cancer cells, but not normal cells, to TRAIL-mediated apoptosis via the ROS-mediated inhibition of Akt signaling and downregulation of c-FLIP(L) and Mcl-1 expression at the post-translational levels. Therefore, the antipsychotic agent thioridazine may potentially be used to overcome TRAIL resistance in cancer cells.

Materials and Methods
Cells and materials
Caki, ACHN, A498, MDA-MB231, and U251MG cells were purchased from the American Type Culture Collection (Manassas, VA, USA). The mouse kidney cells (TMCK-1) were a gift from Dr. T.J. Lee (Yeungnam University, Korea). A primary culture of human mesangial cells (Cryo NHMC) was purchased from Clonetics (San Diego, CA, USA). The cells were cultured in Dulbecco's modified Eagle medium that contained 10% fetal bovine serum, 20 mM Hepes buffer, and 100 mg/ml gentamicin. The PCR primers were obtained from Macrogen Inc. (Seoul, Korea), and the other chemicals were obtained from Sigma (St. Louis, MO, USA). NAC and Trolox were obtained from Calbiochem (San Diego, CA, USA). The anti-DR5, anti-Bcl-2, anti-Bcl-xL, anti-Mcl-1, anti-XIAP, and anti-PARP antibodies were obtained from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Santa Cruz, CA, USA). The anti-procaspase-3 and anticleaved caspase-3 antibody was obtained from Cell Signaling Technology (Beverly, MA, USA). The anti-FADD antibody was obtained from BD Bioscience (San Jose, CA, USA). The anti-c-FLIP(L) antibody was obtained from the ALEXIS Corporation (San Diego, CA, USA). The anti-Bim antibody was obtained from Millipore Corporation (Billerica, MA, USA). The anti-actin antibody was obtained from Sigma. The recombinant human TRAIL was obtained from KOMA Biotech (Seoul, Korea).
Western blot analysis
For the western blotting experiments, the cells were washed with cold phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and lysed on ice in modified RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, 1% NP-40, 0.25% Na-deoxycholate, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM Na3VO4, and 1 mM NaF) containing protease inhibitors (100 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, 10 mg/ml leupeptin, 10 mg/ml pepstatin, and 2 mM EDTA). The lysates were centrifuged at 10 000 x g for 10 min at 4 degC, and the supernatant fractions were collected. The proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE electrophoresis and transferred to Immobilon-P membranes (Millipore Corporation, Billerica, MA, USA). The specific proteins were detected using an enhanced chemiluminescence western blotting kit according to the manufacturer's instructions.
Flow cytometry analysis
For flow cytometry, the cells were resuspended in 100 ml of PBS, and 200 ml of 95% ethanol was added while the cells were being vortexed. The cells were then incubated at 4 degC for 1 h, washed with PBS, resuspended in 250 ml of 1.12% sodium citrate buffer (pH 8.4) with 12.5 mg of RNase, and incubated for an additional 30 min at 37 degC. The cellular DNA was then stained by adding 250 ml of a propidium iodide solution (50 mg/ml) to the cells for 30 min at room temperature. The stained cells were analyzed by fluorescence-activated cell sorting on a FACScan flow cytometer (Becton Dickinson and Co., Franklin Lakes, NY, USA) to determine the relative DNA content, which was based on the red fluorescence intensity.
4',6'-Diamidino-2-phenylindole staining for nuclei condensation and fragmentation
To examine cellular nuclei, the cells were fixed with 1% paraformaldehyde on glass slides for 30 min at room temperature. After fixation, the cells were washed with PBS and a 300 nM 4',6'-diamidino-2-phenylindole solution (Roche, Mannheim, Germany) was added to the fixed cells for 5 min. After the nuclei were stained, the cells were examined by fluorescence microscopy.
The DNA fragmentation assay
The cell death detection ELISA plus kit (Boerhringer Mannheim; Indianapolis, IN, USA) was used to determine the level of apoptosis by detecting fragmented DNA within the nuclei of thioridazine-treated cells, TRAIL-treated cells, or cells that had been treated with a combination of thioridazine and TRAIL. Briefly, each culture plate was centrifuged for 10 min at 200 x g, the supernatant was removed, and the cell pellet was lysed for 30 min. The plate was then centrifuged again at 200 x g for 10 min, and the supernatant that contained the cytoplasmic histone-associated DNA fragments was collected and incubated with an immobilized anti-histone antibody. The reaction products were incubated with a peroxidase substrate for 5 min and measured by spectrophotometry at 405 nm and 490 nm (reference wavelength) with a microplate reader. The signals in the wells containing the substrate alone were subtracted as the background.
Asp-Glu-Val-Asp-ase (DEVDase) activity assay
To evaluate DEVDase activity, cell lysates were prepared after their respective treatments with TRAIL in the presence or absence of thioridazine. Assays were performed in 96-well microtiter plates by incubating 20 mg of cell lysates in 100 ml of reaction buffer (1% NP-40, 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 137 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol) containing a caspase substrate (Asp-Glu-Val-Asp-chromophore-p-nitroanilide (DVAD-pNA)) at 5 mM. Lysates were incubated at 37 degC for 2 h. Thereafter, the absorbance at 405 nm was measured with a spectrophotometer.
Reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction
Total RNA was isolated using the TriZol reagent (Life Technologies; Gaithersburg, MD, USA), and the cDNA was prepared using M-MLV reverse transcriptase (Gibco-BRL; Gaithersburg, MD, USA) according to the manufacturers' instructions. The following primers were used for the amplification of human c-FLIP(L), Mcl-1, and actin: c-FLIP(L) (sense) 5'-CGGACTATAGAGTGCTGATGG-3' and (antisense) 5'-GATTATCAGGCAGATTCCTAG-3', Mcl-1 (sense) 5'-GCGACTGGCAAAGCTTGGCCTCAA-3' and (antisense) 5'-GTTACAGCTTGGATCCCAACTGCA-3', and actin (sense) 5'-GGCATCGTCACCAACTGGGAC-3' and (antisense) 5'-CGATTTCCCGCTCGGCCGTGG-3'. The PCR amplification was carried out using the following cycling conditions: 94 degC for 3 min followed by 17 (actin) or 23 cycles (c-FLIP(L), and Mcl-1) of 94 degC for 45 s, 58 degC for 45 s, 72 degC for 1 min, and a final extension at 72 degC for 10 min. The amplified products were separated by electrophoresis on a 1.5% agarose gel and detected under UV light.
Mcl-1 and c-FLIP(L) constructs and stable cell
The human Mcl-1 and c-FLIP(L) expression vectors were constructed, as described previously.38, 39 The Caki cells were transfected in a stable manner with the pFLAG-CMV-4/Mcl-1 or pcDNA 3.1-c-FLIP(L) plasmid using LipofectAMINE (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA), as prescribed by the manufacturer. After 48 h of incubation, transfected cells were selected in cell culture medium containing 700 mg/ml G418 (Invitrogen). After 2 or 3 weeks, single independent clones were randomly isolated, and each individual clone was plated separately. After clonal expansion, cells from each independent clone were tested for Mcl-1 or c-FLIP(L) expression by immunoblotting and were used in this study.
Proteasome activity assay
The chymotryptic proteasome activities were measured with Suc-LLVY-AMC (chymotryptic substrate, Biomol International, Plymouth Meeting, PA, USA). The cells were collected, washed with PBS, and lysed. A mixture containing 1 mg protein of the cell lysate in 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 10 mM MgCl2, and 2 mM ATP was incubated at 37 degC for 30 min with 50 mM Suc-LLVY-AMC. The enzyme activity was measured with a fluorometric plate reader at an excitation wavelength of 380 nm and an emission wavelength of 440 nm. The measurement of proteasome activity within cells was determined using ZsGreen (proteasome sensor vector)-transfected stable Caki cell lines (BD Biosciences). ZsGreen fused with a destabilization sequence subjected to rapid ubiquitination and degradation by proteasome in mouse ornithine decarboxylase. Fluorescence was detected using a fluorescence microscope and FACS Canto(tm) (BD Biosciences).
Measurement of ROS
The intracellular accumulation of ROS was determined using the fluorescent probes 2',7'-dichlorodihydrofluorescein diacetate (H2DCFDA). H2DCFDA is commonly used to measure ROS generation.40 Caki cells were pretreated with 5 mM NAC, 2 mM GEE, and 200 mM trolox for 30 min, and the cells were then incubated in 10 mM thioridazine for 30 min. The cells were stained with the fluorescent dye H2DCFDA for an additional 10 min. The cells were then trypsinized and resuspended in PBS, and fluorescence was measured at specific time intervals with a flow cytometer (Becton-Dickinson, Franklin Lakes, NJ, USA) or detected by using a fluorescence microscope (Zeiss, Goettingen, Germany).
Densitometry
The band intensities were scanned and quantified using the gel analysis plugin for the open source software ImageJ 1.46 (Imaging Processing and Analysis in Java; ttp://rsb.info.nih.gov/ij).
Statistical analysis
The data were analyzed using a one-way ANOVA and post-hoc comparisons (Student-Newman-Keuls) using the Statistical Package for Social Sciences 8.0 software (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA).
