[Abstract, Introduction, Results, Discussion, Methods, Mixed]

BAP1 loss defines a new class of renal cell carcinoma. The molecular pathogenesis of renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is poorly understood. Whole-genome and exome sequencing followed by innovative tumorgraft analyses (to accurately determine mutant allele ratios) identified several putative two-hit tumor suppressor genes including BAP1. BAP1, a nuclear deubiquitinase, is inactivated in 15% of clear-cell RCCs. BAP1 cofractionates with and binds to HCF-1 in tumorgrafts. Mutations disrupting the HCF-1 binding motif impair BAP1-mediated suppression of cell proliferation, but not H2AK119ub1 deubiquitination. BAP1 loss sensitizes RCC cells in vitro to genotoxic stress. Interestingly, BAP1 and PBRM1 mutations anticorrelate in tumors (P=3x10-5), and combined loss of BAP1 and PBRM1 in a few RCCs was associated with rhabdoid features (q=0.0007). BAP1 and PBRM1 regulate seemingly different gene expression programs, and BAP1 loss was associated with high tumor grade (q=0.0005). Our results establish the foundation for an integrated pathological and molecular genetic classification of RCC, paving the way for subtype-specific treatments exploiting genetic vulnerabilities.

INTRODUCTION
Kidney cancer is estimated to have been diagnosed in over 60,000 individuals
in the US in 20111. Most kidney
tumors are renal cell carcinomas (RCCs) and 70% are of clear-cell type
(ccRCC)2. Despite recent
advances3, when metastatic,
ccRCC remains largely incurable.
ccRCC is characterized by von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) gene
inactivation4-6. VHL, which is on
3p25, is a two-hit tumor suppressor gene. One allele is typically inactivated
through a point mutation (or indel) and the other through a large deletion resulting
in loss-of-heterozygosity (LOH)7,8. Also on 3p is Polybromo 1
(PBRM1), which is frequently mutated in ccRCC9. Other genes implicated in ccRCC
development include SETD210, KDM5C10, and KDM6A11, but their mutation frequency is estimated at
<5%10,11.
ccRCC are classified into low and high grade tumors12, and nuclear grade is an important prognostic
factor13,14. High-grade tumors exhibit mammalian target of
rapamycin (mTOR) complex 1 (mTORC1) activation15. mTORC1 is a critical regulator of cell growth and is
negatively regulated by a complex formed by the tuberous sclerosis complex 1 (TSC1)
and 2 (TSC2) proteins16.
mTOR9,10,17 and TSC118 are both mutated in sporadic ccRCC, however,
mutations are infrequent, and the genetic determinants of tumor grade remain largely
unknown19.

RESULTS
Identification of candidate two-hit tumor suppressor genes
We sequenced the genome of a sporadic high-grade ccRCC and paired normal
sample to >94% coverage and a mean depth >=35x
(Supplementary Figures 1
and 2). We found 6,571 somatically-acquired single-nucleotide
mutations or indels including 59 in protein-coding regions (Supplementary Table 1).
Every mutation evaluated was confirmed by Sanger sequencing (Table 1 and Supplementary Table 2).
However, mutant allele ratios (MARs) - the fraction of mutant over mutant and
wild type alleles for each mutation - were low; few mutations reached
0.5 (expected for heterozygous mutations), and no mutations reached 1 (expected
for mutations accompanied by LOH) (Table
1 and Supplementary
Table 2). In the case of VHL, the MAR was 0.52
(Table 1; Fig. 1a), which suggested a heterozygous mutation. However,
these results conflicted with DNA copy number analyses showing that one copy of
3p was lost (Fig. 1b). We attributed the
low MARs to tumor contamination by normal stroma. Contamination occurred despite
careful sample selection (Supplementary Figure 2c).
Tumor implantation in mice expands the neoplastic compartment while human
stroma is replaced by the host20 and therefore, tumorgrafts may serve to calculate MARs with
accuracy. RCC tumors implanted orthotopically in mice preserve the
characteristics of patient tumors21. We performed Sanger sequencing of mutated genes in a
tumorgraft derived from the index subject's tumor using human-specific
primers. By comparison to tumor MAR (MART) values, tumorgraft MAR
(MARTG) values often increased to ~0.5, and for several
genes, including VHL, they reached 1 (Table 1, Supplementary Figure 3 and Supplementary Table 2).
To determine whether MARTG reflected those expected in the
subject's tumor, we asked whether a correlation existed between
MARTG and the corresponding regional DNA copy numbers in the
patient's tumor (Table 1, Supplementary Table 2 and
Fig. 1b). A correlation was found with
MARTG (p=0.000013), but not with MART
(p=0.054). These data suggest that MARs in tumors are more
accurately determined by evaluating tumorgrafts. Consistent with the notion that
tumorgrafts represent largely pure populations of human tumor cells, paired copy
numbers (PCNs) and allele-specific copy numbers (ASCNs) in tumorgrafts more
closely approached integer values (Table
1 and Fig. 1b and Supplementary Table
2).
To identify putative two-hit tumor suppressor genes, we searched for
genes with MARTG~1. Some genes (STK40,
UBE3B, HS6ST3, STK24,
C1orf167, ADAMTSL1 and C14orf43) were in
regions of deletion (PCNTG~1), whereas others
(CRISPLD1, TMEM151A, TREH
and CTNND1) were in areas of copy-neutral LOH
(PCNTG~2 and tumorgraft ASCNmin~0 and
ASCNmax~2) (Table
1, Fig. 1b). Because mutations
in copy-neutral LOH regions could be either homozygous (e.g.
CRISPLD1) or heterozygous (such as ZNF434)
(Table 1, Fig. 1b), accurate MARs were essential to establish whether
mutated genes were putative two-hit tumor suppressors.
Accurate MARs were also helpful in inferring whether in areas of
duplication (PCNTG~3) the allele amplified was mutant (e.g.
GFPT2; MARTG = 0.65 (expected 0.66)) or
wild-type (e.g. DIAPH1; MARTG = 0.31 (expected
0.33)) (Table 1). In the case of
GFPT2, the mutation may have preceded the duplication,
whereas in the case of DIAPH1, the mutation is likely to have
followed the duplication. Thus, analyses in tumorgrafts identified candidate
tumor suppressor genes and shed light into the temporal sequence of mutation
acquisition.
Evaluation of somatically mutated genes in a discovery cohort
Twenty-one genes mutated in the sequenced ccRCC and not previously
examined by the Sanger Institute10 were sequenced in a discovery set of 76 ccRCCs, and
mutations were examined in the corresponding normal samples (Supplementary Table 3).
As determined by VHL sequencing, which revealed somatically
acquired mutations in 79% of tumors (see Supplementary Data 1),
sensitivity for mutation detection was excellent. Several putative two-hit tumor
suppressor genes were mutated at higher than expected frequencies including
CRISPLD1, which was mutated in two additional tumors
(q=0.044) and TMEM151A, mutated in three
(q=0.005) (Supplementary Table 4). In addition, several other genes
were recurrently mutated including OCA2 and
MT-ND1 (Supplementary Table 4). Germline mutations in OCA2
cause autosomal recessive oculocutaneous albinism type 2 and the two somatic
mutations we identified (p.Pro211Leu and p.Val443Ile; Supplementary Table 4)
are known disease-causing mutations22,23. Two
additional somatically-acquired mutations were found in MT-ND1
(Supplementary Table
4), a gene mutated in oncocytomas, a benign tumor type24. Their presence in ccRCC
suggests that oncocytomas could transform into malignant tumors. Transformation
may result from VHL inactivation, which was observed in all the
tumors with somatic ND1 mutations (Supplementary Data 1). VHL inactivation could change the
morphological appearance of the tumor by affecting cellular metabolism and
angiogenesis. In addition, 3 additional mutations were identified in
TSC1, which we previously reported elsewhere18.
Exome sequencing identifies BAP1 as a candidate two-hit
tumor suppressor gene
We performed exome sequencing on 7 ccRCC primary tumors, including 6 of
high grade (and corresponding normal samples). A metastasis from one patient was
also sequenced. We found 345 somatically acquired mutations (Supplementary Table 5).
In the tumor/metastasis pair we observed 37 and 39 mutations respectively and 32
were shared.
To determine concordance of the mutations called, we performed Sanger
sequencing. If concordance was >95%, Sanger sequencing of 82
mutations would predict for >90% accuracy for the whole cohort.
Among 82 randomly selected mutations, 78 were confirmed (see methods) with an
accuracy >95% (Supplementary Table 6 and Supplementary Data 2). For 7 samples, there were
tumorgrafts, and sequencing analyses of mutated genes therein, uncovered 16
potential two-hit tumor suppressor genes (Supplementary Table
6).
We focused on 10 genes mutated in at least two tumors (Supplementary Table 7).
All the mutations validated by Sanger sequencing. Whereas MART
analysis failed to identify any putative two-hit tumor suppressors, another gene
besides VHL and PBRM1 exhibited
MARTG~1, BAP1 (Supplementary Table
7).
BAP1 sequencing in the discovery set of 76 ccRCCs
identified 11 non-synonymous mutations, including 10 confirmed to be somatically
acquired (Table 2). Examination of a
validation ccRCC set (n=92), with corresponding normal samples,
uncovered 11 additional nonsynonymous mutations, including 10 that were
somatically acquired (Table 2). Two
mutations without matching normal samples were truncating and likely
deleterious. Altogether, the BAP1 mutation rate was 14%
(24/176 tumors). BAP1 encodes a nuclear deubiquitinatinase
(DUB) of the ubiquitin C-terminal hydrolase (UCH)-domain containing
family25-27 that is mutated in both
uveal28 and cutaneous
melanoma29 as well as
in mesothelioma30. In ccRCC,
most mutations were predicted to truncate the protein and mutations were
enriched in the UCH domain (Fig. 2a and
b).
Development of a clinical IHC assay for BAP1 detection
As most mutations were truncating, we developed, in a CLIA-certified
laboratory, an immunohistochemistry (IHC) test for the presence/absence of BAP1
protein. Genetically characterized ccRCC samples validated by western blot were
used as controls (Fig. 2c and d). Scoring
was performed by a clinical pathologist (P.K.) masked to the
BAP1 genotype. IHC was interpretable in 175/176 tumors.
Nuclear BAP1 was detected in 150 tumors, and 148 were wild-type (Supplementary Figure 4).
The 2 discordant samples had missense mutations (p.Gly13Val and p.Phe170Leu).
Twenty-five samples were negative by IHC and 22 had BAP1
mutations. Analysis of an IHC-negative but BAP1 wild type
sample by western blot failed to reveal detectable BAP1 protein suggesting that
other mechanisms exist to inactivate BAP1. Overall, the positive and negative
predictive values of the IHC test were ~100% and 98.6%,
respectively.
Structural analyses of BAP1 missense mutations
To evaluate missense mutations in a structural context, we generated a
BAP1 protein model on the basis of the related family members Uch-L3 and Uch37
(Fig. 2b). Since ubiquitin binding
orders a significant portion of the protein, the UCH domain of BAP1 was modeled
after Uch-L3 bound to ubiquitin (PDB: 1xd3). The interaction with the ULD domain
was built by superimposing Uch37 (PDB: 3ihr). Four mutations abrogated protein
expression; 3 were predicted to destabilize the protein (p.Val43Gly and
p.Leu112Pro removed side chains that contribute to the hydrophobic core, and
p.Ala95Pro disrupted the backbone of a central a-helix) and the fourth
(p.His144Asn) disrupted the position of a flexible loop (Fig. 2b). Two mutations did not abrogate protein expression
(p.Gly13Val and p.Phe170Leu). These mutations disrupted side chains implicated
in either an intramolecular interaction with the ULD domain (Gly13) or ubiquitin
binding (Phe170), and highlight the importance of these interactions for tumor
suppressor function.
BAP1 suppresses RCC cell proliferation and deubiquitinates H2Aub1 in renal
cancer cells
Studies of the role of BAP1 in cell proliferation have led to
conflicting results25-27,30-33. To
examine BAP1 in an appropriate context, ccRCC cell lines were sought in which
natural selection had led to BAP1 inactivation. Among 12 RCC
cell lines examined initially, only 769-P had a BAP1 mutation
(Supplementary Table
8). The mutation (c.97T>G; p.Tyr33Asp) disrupted a residue
binding ubiquitin and did not abrogate protein expression (Fig. 2b and Fig.
3a).
To determine the role of BAP1, 769-P cells were reconstituted with
epitope-tagged wild-type BAP1 (or an empty vector control). BAP1 repressed cell
proliferation without causing apoptosis (Fig.
3a and data not shown). However, BAP1 did not completely abrogate
cell proliferation. To determine whether endogenous mutant BAP1 acted as a
dominant negative, endogenous BAP1 was depleted using shRNA.
However, mutant BAP1 depletion did not increase the effects of ectopically
expressed wild-type BAP1 indicating that mutant BAP1 does not function in a
dominant negative fashion (Fig. 3b).
The BAP1 orthologue in Drosophila, Calypso, targets
monoubiquitinated histone H2A (H2Aub1)34. An examination of H2AK119ub1 levels in 769-P cells
reconstituted with wild-type BAP1 showed downregulation of basal H2Aub1 levels
indicating that mammalian BAP1 similarly deubiquitinates H2A in renal cancer
cells (Fig. 3c).
BAP1 binds HCF-1 and HCF-1 binding is required for suppression of cell
proliferation
BAP1 interacts with host cell factor-1 (HCF-1)31,33,35, which serves as a scaffold
for several chromatin remodeling complexes36. HCF-1 binds to multiple transcription factors
including several E2Fs37,38, and recruits histone
modifying enzymes such as Set1/MLL1 histone methyltransferases39-41, LSD1 histone demethylase42, Sin3 histone
deacetylase39, and MOF
histone acetyltransferase43.
We asked whether BAP1 interacted with HCF-1 in 769-P cells. An
interaction was confirmed by reciprocal immunoprecipitation experiments (Fig. 3d). Interestingly, anti-HCF-1
antibodies depleted BAP1 from cell extracts to the same extent as anti-BAP1
antibodies, suggesting that, as in other cell types35, the majority of BAP1 in renal cancer cells is
bound to HCF-1 (Fig. 3d). BAP1 has been
proposed to deubiquitinate HCF-131,33 and regulate
HCF-1 levels31, but consistent
with other reports33, HCF-1
levels were similar in BAP1-deficient and reconstituted 769-P cells (Fig. 3d).
We mutated sequences in BAP1 encoding the HCF-1 binding motif and
evaluated this mutant (HBM) in cell proliferation assays. HBM suppressed HCF-1
binding and compromised the inhibitory effect of BAP1 on cell proliferation
(Fig. 3e). However, the HBM mutant did
not differ from wild-type BAP1 in its ability to deubiquitinate H2A (Fig. 3f). Thus, BAP1 binds HCF-1, and binding
to HCF-1, but not H2Aub1 deubiquitination, is important for the inhibition of
cell proliferation.
Next, we performed gel-filtration chromatography. Extracts from 769-P
cells expressing either an empty vector or wild-type BAP1 were fractionated
using a size-exclusion column and subjected to western blotting. As shown in
Supplementary Figure
5, most BAP1 was found in complexes >1 MDa and eluted with
HCF-1.
BAP1 loss sensitizes renal cancer cells to radiation and PARP
inhibitors
BAP1 is phosphorylated following DNA damage44,45 and
we asked whether BAP1 loss affected the response to g-irradiation. Empty
vector and BAP1 reconstituted 769-P cells exhibited a similar pattern of Rad51
and gH2AX foci (Supplementary Figure 6a). However, BAP1-deficient cells were more
sensitive to ionizing radiation (Supplementary Figure 6b) and fewer colonies formed in
clonogenic assays (Supplementary Figure 6c). In addition, BAP1 loss sensitized cells to
the PARP inhibitor olaparib (Supplementary Figure 6d and e).
We examined 4 additional ccRCC cell lines (Supplementary Table 8).
UMRC6 lacked BAP1 protein and had a frameshift mutation (c.430delC) (Supplementary Figure 7a and
b). As in 769-P cells, (i) cell proliferation was inhibited by
wild-type BAP1 and substantially less so by an HBM mutant, (ii) the HBM mutant
reduced H2Aub1 levels, (iii) BAP1 cofractionated with HCF-1, and (iv)
restoration of BAP1 protected UMRC6 cells against genotoxic death (Supplementary Figure
7).
BAP1 binds HCF-1 and elutes with HCF-1 in tumorgrafts
The usefulness of RCC cell lines is limited by the development of
mutations and copy number alterations as tumor cells adapt to growth in
culture7,46. Divergence from tumors may be
particularly striking with respect to epigenetic regulation, as growth
conditions of cell lines and tumors are very different. In contrast, the pattern
of gene expression is reproduced in tumorgrafts growing orthotopically in
mice21 and
tumorgrafts, like cell lines, represent a renewable source of tumor material. To
determine whether the interaction of BAP1 with HCF-1 was physiologically
significant, we analyzed tumorgrafts. As in cell lines, BAP1 bound to and
co-fractionated with HCF-1 (Fig. 4a and b).
In addition, we examined whether there was a correlation between
BAP1 mutation and H2Aub1 levels in tumorgrafts, but no
correlation was observed (Fig. 4c). Taken
together these data show that BAP1 binding to HCF-1 is likely to be important
for BAP1 suppression of RCC development.
BAP1 loss is associated with high grade
Deep sequencing studies largely focused on high-grade tumors. An
analysis of all 176 tumors examined showed that BAP1 loss correlated with high
Fuhrman nuclear grade (q=0.0005) (Supplementary Data 1).
Because nuclear grade is associated with mTORC1 activation15, we tested whether a
correlation existed with between BAP1 loss and mTORC1 activity. As determined by
the phosphorylation of both S6 and 4E-BP1, BAP1 loss correlated with mTORC1
activation (q=3*10-4 and 0.029,
respectively) (Fig. 5a and Supplementary Data 1).
This association did not appear to be direct, however, and similar levels of
mTORC1 activation were observed in BAP1-deficient and wild-type
BAP1-reconstituted cells (Supplementary Figure 8).
BAP1 and PBRM1 mutations anticorrelate in
ccRCC
To explore whether a relationship existed between the loss of BAP1 and
PBRM1, we first developed an IHC assay for PBRM1 (also known as BAF180) (Fig. 5a). Evaluation of the 176 tumors showed
confident PBRM1 staining for 146 samples, and 53% were negative for
PBRM1 (Supplementary Data
1). As PBRM1 was lost in ~50% of tumors, BAP1 loss
should distribute equally between PBRM1-expressing and -deficient tumors.
However, only 4 of 21 BAP1-IHC-deficient tumors were also deficient for PBRM1
(Supplementary Figure
9a). These results suggest that PBRM1 and BAP1 loss anticorrelated in
tumors (p=7*10-4).
To explore this further, we sequenced PBRM1 in the 176
ccRCCs. We identified 92 somatic mutations, including 6 missense mutations
(Supplementary Data
1). Structural analyses are shown in Supplementary Figure 10.
We correlated sequencing data with the results from IHC; ~90% in
of samples that were negative for PBRM1 by IHC had a mutation, and
~90% of the samples that were positive were wild type
(p=4*10-23; Supplementary Figure 9b).
An analysis of BAP1 and PBRM1 mutations in
tumors revealed that only 3 of 24 samples with BAP1 mutations
had a somatically-acquired PBRM1 mutation (Supplementary Figure 9c).
Once again, an anticorrelation was found
(p=3*10-5).
As a reference, we evaluated the distribution of mutations in
SETD2 and KDM5C respect to
PBRM1 in ccRCCs from the Sanger Institute9,10. Among 348 ccRCCs genotyped for PBRM1,
15 mutations in SETD2 were observed, and these mutations
distributed similarly between PBRM1 mutant and wild-type tumors
(8 vs. 7; Supplementary Data
3). KDM5C mutations were also similarly distributed
(5 vs. 4; Supplementary Data
3).
Combining the IHC and mutation data, 5 out of 27 BAP1-deficient tumors
were also deficient for PBRM1. Assuming a binomial distribution of BAP1 loss,
these data indicate that simultaneous inactivation of BAP1 and PBRM1 is
negatively selected for in tumors (p=0.0008). Notably, however,
loss of BAP1 or PBRM1 was observed in 70% of ccRCC (Fig. 5b).
To obtain further insight into the relationship between BAP1 and PBRM1,
we performed gene expression analyses. We grouped tumors and tumorgrafts
according to their BAP1 and PBRM1 status and evaluated differences with respect
to wild-type tumors and tumorgrafts (Fig.
5c). Probesets (probes) that we had previously determined using
tumorgrafts to be driven by non-neoplastic cells21 were excluded from the analysis. We identified
1,451 probes that were deregulated in BAP1-deficient tumors by comparison to
those that were wild type (for both BAP1 and
PBRM1) (q<0.05) (Supplementary Data 4). A
similar number of probes distinguished PBRM1-deficient tumors (Supplementary Data 4).
These two datasets shared 94 probes in common (Fig. 5d). However, the overlap expected at random was 67. Similarly,
pathway analyses of the two signatures showed little overlap. These results
suggest that BAP1 and PBRM1 do not function in the same pathway, and that the
tumorigenic advantage to mutating BAP1 and
PBRM1 is context dependent.
Further supporting the notion that loss of BAP1 and PBRM1 in tumors is
not equivalent, analyses of the 176 tumors showed that PBRM1 loss was not
associated with high grade (q=0.26) (Supplementary Data 1). In
the 348 ccRCC tumors sequenced by the Sanger Institute9,10 (Supplementary Data 3), we
found a non-significant correlation between PBRM1 loss and low grade
(p=0.074). Furthermore, when focusing the analyses of 176
tumors on those that had exclusively lost PBRM1, a statistically significant
correlation with low tumor grade was found (q=0.025).
Tumors with simultaneous inactivation of BAP1 and
PBRM1 exhibit rhabdoid features
A few tumors had loss of both BAP1 and
PBRM1 (n=5) (Supplementary Data 1).
While co-ocurrence of mutations in tumors may not indicate their occurrence
together in the same cell and there is substantial mutation heterogeneity in
RCC17,47, in two tumors for which tumorgrafts were
available, MARTG for both BAP1 and
PBRM1 were ~1 and no wild-type alleles were
detected (data not shown). These data suggest that the two mutations were indeed
present in the same tumor cells and highlight another application of
tumorgrafts.
Tumors deficient for both BAP1 and PBRM1 were uniformly of high grade
and exhibited characteristic features: abundant acidophilic cytoplasm, eccentric
nuclei and prominent macronucleoli (Fig.
5a). These features were consistent with rhabdoid morphology48, a form of dedifferentiation
portending aggressive tumor behavior49. They were present in all tumors for which there was
sufficient material for analysis (4/5), and while not unique to tumors deficient
for both BAP1 and PBRM1, the association was significant
(q=0.0007; Supplementary Data 1).

DISCUSSION
These results implicate BAP1 as a tumor suppressor in ccRCC
and establish the foundation for a molecular genetic classification of RCC. We show
that 70% of ccRCCs lose either BAP1 or PBRM1, that tumors tend to segregate
into BAP1 or PBRM1-deficient subtypes, and that BAP1 loss but not PBRM1 loss is
associated with high tumor grade.
BAP1 functions as a two-hit tumor suppressor in ccRCC and consistent with
this, mutant BAP1 does not act as dominant negative. Both copies of
BAP1 are also lost in melanoma28,29,50 and mesothelioma30,51. While the number of RCC samples with BAP1
mutations is small, it is interesting that no second-hit point mutations or indels
were observed. In contrast, both BAP1 alleles may be inactivated
through a point mutation (or indel) in mesothelioma51. We speculate that the different modes of
inactivation of the "second" BAP1 allele reflect
tissue-specific tumor suppressor gene cooperativity. Indeed, in ccRCC, 3p loss may
simultaneously inactivate several genes suppressing renal tumorigenesis including,
most importantly, VHL, which is rarely mutated in other tumor
types. In metastatic uveal melanoma, whole chromosome 3 losses are frequent, and
other melanoma metastasis suppressors may exist on 3q. Thus, the deletion
architecture of tumors may reflect tissue-specific cooperativity of tumor suppressor
genes.
We propose that following a VHL mutation, which likely
represents an early event17, the
loss of 3p leaves cells vulnerable to the loss of the remaining
PBRM1 or BAP1 allele. The acquisition of a
PBRM1 or BAP1 mutation may set the course for
ccRCCs with different properties. PBRM1 and BAP1 likely affect different epigenetic
programs, and BAP1 loss is associated with high grade and mTORC1 activation.
Interestingly, whereas mutations in SETD2, also on 3p, appear to
distribute equally between PBRM1-deficient and wild-type tumors,
this is not the case for BAP1 mutations. PBRM1 and
BAP1 mutations anticorrelate in ccRCC. These data suggest that
there is a genetic context of tumor suppressor function and that simultaneous loss
of BAP1 and PBRM1 in most tumors may be disadvantageous.
The clinical implications of BAP1 loss remain to be explored. Inasmuch as
BAP1 loss was associated with high tumor grade and correlated with metastasis
development in uveal melanoma28,
BAP1 loss in ccRCC may be associated with poor prognosis. From a therapeutic
standpoint, while RCC is considered radioresistant, BAP1-deficient tumors may be
more sensitive. Evaluating the prognostic and therapeutic implications of BAP1 loss
will be greatly facilitated by the development in a clinical laboratory of a highly
sensitive and specific IHC assay.
Interestingly, BAP1 is mutated in the germline, where it
predisposes to melanoma and mesothelioma28,29,50,51. Given
the role of BAP1 in sporadic ccRCC, germline BAP1 mutations may
similarly predispose to RCC. In fact, a germline variant (c.121G>A;
p.Gly41Ser) was identified in one individual who had two first and one second degree
relatives with RCC and who had been previously evaluated for a germline
VHL mutation, which he did not have. In addition, a recently
reported pedigree had one individual with a germline BAP1 mutation
who had RCC51. Thus, BAP1 mutation
in the germline may predispose to RCC, in which case, RCC development may also be
initiated by loss of BAP1.
Multiple lines of evidence implicate HCF-1 in BAP1-mediated RCC tumor
suppression function. First, BAP1 binds to and cofractionates with HCF-1. Second, as
determined by immunodepletion experiments, the majority of BAP1 is bound to HCF-1.
HCF-1 is a very abundant protein52
and this may explain why mutant BAP1 does not function as a dominant negative.
Third, the growth inhibitory effect of BAP1 is compromised by a mutation that, while
not disrupting protein structure (as determined by deubiquitinating activity),
disrupts HCF-1 binding. Finally, the interaction with HCF-1 is unlikely to reflect
an abnormal epigenetic state of tumor cell lines in culture, as BAP1 binds to and
cofractionates with HCF-1 also in tumorgrafts. Tantalizingly however, the HCF-1
binding motif in BAP1 is not conserved in the
Drosophila Calypso protein.
The role of H2Aub1 in ccRCC requires further study. BAP1 binding to HCF-1
was required for the suppression of cell proliferation but dispensable for H2Aub1
deubiquitination. Thus, these two functions of BAP1, HCF-1 binding and H2Aub1
deubiquitination, can be separated. We did not find a correlation between BAP1
inactivation and global H2Aub1 levels in tumors. Nevertheless, the levels of H2Aub1
were not uniform across tumors and we cannot rule out that BAP1 may affect the
levels of H2Aub1 at specific sites.
Our studies were greatly aided by the availability of tumorgrafts.
Tumorgrafts were instrumental in determining mutant allele ratios with accuracy and
for the identification of putative two-hit tumor suppressor genes. They made
possible determining the co-occurrence of mutations in tumor cells and when
mutations occurred in regions of amplification, they shed light on the temporal
sequence of mutation acquisition. Finally, tumorgrafts provided a renewable source
of tumor material allowing us to evaluate the significance of biochemical
observations made in cell lines in culture.
While this manuscript was in preparation, a brief communication reported a
list of 12 genes mutated in ccRCC53, including TSC1, which we previously showed to
be mutated in sporadic ccRCC18,
and BAP1. The mutation frequency reported for BAP1
was 8%, but a VHL mutation frequency of 27%
suggests low sensitivity.

ONLINE METHODS
Regulatory
Patients provided written informed consent of an Institutional Review
Board (IRB)-approved protocol for tissue collection for genetic studies.
Whole-genome and exome sequences were released in dbGaP for those patients
giving explicit authorization in the consent form.
Annotation
Patient tumor samples are labeled with a number or a number preceded by
a T if those samples were also used for tumorgraft generation. Tumorgrafts are
labeled with the same number as patient tumors prefixed by "TG"
and followed by the cohort "c" number (when applicable),
referring to the tumor passage (e.g. c0 for primary tumorgraft).
Staging was based on the TNM classification from the American Joint
Committee on Cancer. Samples were annotated according to the corresponding
edition based on the date of surgery. Per the seventh edition, all tumors with
lymph node metastases were referred to as pN1. All Fuhrman grade 3 and 4 samples
were reviewed by P.K. for the presence of rhabdoid features.
Tissue selection
ccRCC and adjacent normal kidney samples were frozen fresh in liquid
nitrogen and stored at -80degC. Tumor content and quality was
inferred by a pathologist from perpendicular sections immediately flanking
1-3 mm thick fragments that were oriented using pathology dyes (Supplementary Fig. 2c).
For whole-genome sequencing a sample was selected with ~90%
tumor content in both sections. For the Discovery Set, 76 ccRCC samples with
>=80% tumor cellularity were selected among 431 fresh-frozen
tumor samples from 133 patients. Seven tumor samples and a metastasis with
>=85% tumor cellularity were selected for exome sequencing among
16 patients with tumorgrafts growing in mice21. For the Validation Set, 92 ccRCC samples with
>=70% tumor cellularity were selected among 535 fresh-frozen
tumor samples from 165 RCC patients. Genomic DNA and RNA were simultaneous
extracted from each tissue (detailed in the Supplementary Note).
Reference DNA, extracted from either adjacent normal kidney or peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMCs), was available for 71/76 tumors in the Discovery Set
and 82/92 tumors of the Validation Set.
Whole-genome sequencing of paired-end libraries from tumor and matched normal
genomes
Tumor and PBMCs samples were processed in a CLIA-certified and
CAP-accredited laboratory. The preparation of short-insert (212-263 bp)
Illumina paired-end sequencing libraries, flow cells and clusters have been
described previously54.
Paired-end sequence reads of 100 bases were generated using the Genome Analyzer
IIx. Image analysis, base calling and Phred quality scoring were performed using
the Illumina analysis pipeline (RTA, v1.5). Sequence reads were filtered out
from clusters whose proximity to others resulted in mixed sequence data.
Whole-genome somatic substitution and indel detection
Single-nucleotide variants (SNVs) from the reference sequence (human
NCBI36.1) were determined separately for the tumor and normal genomes using
CASAVA, v1.6. Prediction of a homozygous SNV required a minimum allele score of
10 (equivalent to at least three high quality (Q33) base calls). Additionally,
for heterozygous calls, the second allele was required to have a score of at
least 6 (equivalent to two Q30 base calls) and the ratio of the two allele
scores had to be <=3, so that allele ratios did not deviate from the
expected 1:1 for heterozygous calls. Indels relative to human NCBI36.1 were
predicted using GROUPER. SNVs and indels in the tumor were only considered as
candidate somatic events if the read depth at the equivalent site in the normal
genome build was at least 10. SNVs and indels observed in both genomes were
subtracted from the tumor calls. Previously known SNPs (dbSNP130) were also
removed. Indels in the tumor overlapping a contig of assembled shadow reads in
the normal genome, were removed. The impact of somatic changes on protein coding
and non-coding genes was annotated using Ensembl version 54.
Exome capture and sequencing
Exome capture was performed by Illumina FastTrack using Illumina Truseq
exome target enrichment. For more details, please see Supplementary Note.
Exome mutation detection and validation
The sequences of tumor, metastasis, and normal samples were compared to
NCBI reference sequence and SNVs and indels were determined independently using
CASAVA v1.8.0a4 without any filtering. Mutations predicted in tumors also
present in the corresponding normal samples were eliminated (Supplementary Table 5).
Synonymous mutations were removed and the resulting mutations were inspected
visually using the Integrative Genomics Viewer (IGV, see URLs) to confirm that
their presence in tumor but not normal sequence reads (see Supplementary Table 5).
All genes with recurrent mutations were validated by Sanger sequencing (Supplementary Table 7).
For the rest, a mutation calling accuracy of >95% for 82
mutations would signify >90% accuracy for the whole cohort,
according to a cumulative hypergeometric distribution. Sanger sequencing of 82
randomly-selected mutations (proportional to the number of mutations in seven
tumors and one metastasis) showed 4 false positives (MAR in tumor or metastasis
<0.1 and MARTG<0.2; <5%), all of
which had been scored based on two mutant reads (Supplementary Table 6).
Among the remaining genes, those with just two mutant reads (3) were inferred to
represent false positives (see Supplementary Data 2).
Mutation Analyses and Mutant Allele Ratios (MARs)
Single-nucleotide variants and indels in chromatograms were scored with
Mutation Surveyor v3.30 and v3.98 (Softgenetics) using an overlapping factor of
0.2 and a dropping factor of 0.1. Reference sequences were obtained from NCBI.
Only bidirectionally-observed somatic mutations are reported. Mutations within
seven nucleotides before or after an exon were considered to be splice-site
mutations. A somatically-acquired PBRM1 variant outside this
range (15 nt upstream of exon 8) was not included in the analyses (sample ID
78).
Mutant allele ratios (MARs) refer to the fraction of mutant allele for a
particular mutation over the sum of mutant plus wild-type alleles (MAR of 1,
only mutant allele detected; MAR of 0.5, mutant and wild-type alelles detected
at similar frequencies). MARs were calculated by measuring the nucleotide
intensities of chromatograms using ImageJ (see URLs) (whole-genome data) or the
Mutation Quantifier function of Mutation Surveyor v3.98 (exome data). For
indels, MARs were calculated taking the average of the measurements of at least
five nucleotides. MARs were scored as <0.10 if they accounted for
<10% of all alleles, but were clearly present in tumorgrafts.
For Illumina tracings, MARs were based on the number of mutant over total
reads.
Copy Number Analyses
Genomic DNA was hybridized to Affymetrix SNP Arrays 6.0 at the Genome
Science Resource (Vanderbilt University) using standard procedures. Several
tumor and tumorgraft SNP arrays were previously evaluated for other purposes and
have been reported elsewhere21. CEL files were quantile normalized with Partek Genomics Suite
6.5 (Partek Inc., St. Louis, MO) adjusting for fragment length and probe
sequence without background correction. Paired copy numbers for tumors and
tumorgrafts were calculated from the intensities of the corresponding normal
samples. Genotypes were estimated using birdseed v2 algorithm in Affymetrix
Genotyping Console 4.0. Regions of allelic imbalance were identified by
determining the allele-specific copy number for the primary tumor or tumorgraft
respect to normal DNA using Partek Genomics Suite. Copy numbers were adjusted
for local GC content and were segmented using Circulary Binary Segmentation
(CBS)55, where
log2 ratios were analyzed with the DNAcopy
package of R/Bioconductor (see URLs) considering a type I error
(a=0.001) and a minimum segment size of 5 markers. Maximum and minimum
allele-specific copy numbers were segmented independently by CBS.
Establishment and maintenance of tumorgrafts
Tumorgraft studies were approved by the IACUC. Fresh tumor fragments
(~2 mm in diameter) were implanted in the kidney of NOD/SCID mice as
described elsewhere21.
Gene Expression Analyses
RNA samples were labeled with biotin and hybridized to Affymetrix Human
Genome U133 Plus 2.0 arrays by the UTSW Microarray Core. Gene expression arrays
on 13 out of 29 tumors and tumorgrafts were previously evaluated to identify a
tumor-specific signature and have been previously reported21. CEL intensity files were
analyzed as described elsewhere56. Probesets with non-specific hybridization were removed
(8,696, 16%). 2,443 probesets representing signal attributed to
stromal/immune signature21
were similarly removed. Tumors and tumorgrafts with mutations in either
BAP1 or PBRM1 (but not both) were compared
to tumors and tumorgrafts wild type for both BAP1 and
PBRM1 using t tests and a Benjamini and
Hochberg false discovery rate (FDR) correction57. Probesets with FDR
q<0.05 were analyzed with Ingenuity Pathways Analysis
(IPA).
Statistics
To determine whether a correlation (inverse correlation) existed between
regional DNA copy numbers and MARTG (or MART), a
two-tailed Spearman correlation test was utilized (data not normally distributed
according to a Shapiro-Wilk test). Correlations were compared as previously
described58. The
p values for the identification of 2 or 3 additional gene
mutations among the 76 patients of the Discovery Set were calculated using a
binomial distribution assuming, based on the index patient, that the probability
of identifying a non-synonymous mutation in a gene was 0.0022 (47 mutations
among the 21,099 protein-coding genes annotated in GRCh37.p6 assembly). For the
Sanger Institute dataset9,10, the highest tumor grade was
used for each tumor. Throughout, a Fisher's exact test was used to
determine if there were nonrandom associations between two binary variables. A
Benjamini and Hochberg FDR correction of the p values
(q values) was calculated to account for multiple
comparisons57. SPSS
Statistics 17.0 and SAS 9.0 were used to analyze data.
Primer sequences and antibody information are provided in Supplementary Tables 9 and
10, respectively. Further details and description of other
experimental methods and materials are available in the Supplementary Note.

Supplementary Material
Suppl. Data 1
Suppl. Data 2
Suppl. Data 3
Suppl. Data 4
Supp. Note, Figures, and Tables
