[Abstract, Introduction, Mixed, Results, Discussion]

Screening and identification of a renal carcinoma specific peptide from a phage display peptide library. Background Specific peptide ligands to cell surface receptors have been extensively used in tumor research and clinical applications. Phage display technology is a powerful tool for the isolation of cell-specific peptide ligands. To screen and identify novel markers for renal cell carcinoma, we evaluated a peptide that had been identified by phage display technology.   Methods A renal carcinoma cell line A498 and a normal renal cell line HK-2 were used to carry out subtractive screening in vitro with a phage display peptide library. After three rounds of panning, there was an obvious enrichment for the phages specifically binding to the A498 cells, and the output/input ratio of phages increased about 100 fold. A group of peptides capable of binding specifically to the renal carcinoma cells were obtained, and the affinity of these peptides to the targeting cells and tissues was studied.   Results Through a cell-based ELISA, immunocytochemical staining, immunohistochemical staining, and immunofluorescence, the Phage ZT-2 and synthetic peptide ZT-2 were shown to specifically bind to the tumor cell surfaces of A498 and incision specimens, but not to normal renal tissue samples.   Conclusion A peptide ZT-2, which binds specifically to the renal carcinoma cell line A498 was selected from phage display peptide libraries. Therefore, it provides a potential tool for early diagnosis of renal carcinoma or targeted drug delivery in chemotherapy.

Introduction
Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) accounts for 3% of all adult malignancies and is the most lethal urological cancer. It accounted more than 57, 000 new cases and 13, 000 cancer-related deaths in the United States in 2009[1]. In China around 23, 000 new patients with RCC are diagnosed each year, and the incidence is increasing rapidly due to the aging population [2]. Approximately 60% of patients have clinically localized disease at presentation, with the majority undergoing curative nephrectomy. However, metastatic disease recurs in a third of these patients. The patients with metastatic RCC have a poor prognosis with a median survival time of 1 to 2 years [3]. Detection of RCC in early stages helps increase the life expectancy of the patient [4]. Two diagnosis methods, histopathology and image procedures (computed tomography scan, ultrasonography, or magnetic resonance imaging) provide increase the early detection of the RCC. Histopathologically, although several promising biomarkers such as Carbonic anhydrase IX, B7-H1 and P53 for RCC have been under investigation, none currently have been validated or are in routine use [5,6]. Therefore, some novel molecular markers must be screened and identified for improving early diagnosis and prognosis of RCC.
Phage display is a molecular diversity technology that allows the presentation of large peptide and protein libraries on the surface of filamentous phage. Phage display libraries permit the selection of peptides and proteins, including antibodies, with high affinity and specificity for all targets. An important distinctive mark of this technology is the direct link that exists between the experimental phenotype and its encapsulated genotype. Phage display technology is a powerful tool for the selection of cell-specific peptide ligands at present [7]. Some laboratories have applied this technology to isolate peptide ligands with good affinity and specificity for a variety of cell types. The specific ligands isolated from phage libraries can be used in diagnostic probe, therapeutic target validation, and drug design and vaccine development [8-10].
In the present study, we identified a specific novel peptide that bound to the cell surface of renal carcinoma cell line A498 generated in this laboratory by using in vitro phage-displayed random peptide libraries. Our results demonstrate that this biopanning strategy can be used to identify tumor-specific targeting peptides. One of our selected peptides, ZT-2 was most effective in targeting cells and tissues, indicating its potential for use in early diagnosis and targeted therapy of RCC.

Materials
Renal carcinoma line A498 and a normal renal cell line HK-2 were obtained from Medical Academy of China (Beijing, PR China). Fetal calf serum (FCS) and Dulbecco's modified eagle's medium (DMEM) were purchased from Gibco (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, USA). Phage DNA sequencing was performed by Shanghai Sangon Corp (Shanghai, PR China). Peptide ZT-2 (QQPPMHLMSYAG) and a nonspecific control peptide (EAFSILQWPFAH) were synthesized and labeled with fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC) by Shanghai Bioengineering Ltd. Mass analysis of the peptides was confirmed by a matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry, and all peptides were > 90% pure as determined by reverse-phase HPLC. Peptide stock solutions were prepared in PBS (pH 7.4). Horseradish peroxidase-conjugated sheep anti-rabbit antibody and rabbit anti-M13 bacteriophage antibody were purchased from Pharmacia (Peapack, NJ, USA). Trizol reagents were purchased from Gibco BRL (Gaithersburg, MD, USA) and the reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) system kits were purchased from Promega (Madison, WI, USA).
The Ph.D.-12 phage display peptide library kit (New England Biolabs, Beverly, MA, USA) was used to screen specific peptides binding to A498 cells. The phage display library contains random peptides constructed at the N terminus of the minor coat protein (cpIII) of the M13 phage. The titer of the library is 2.3 x 1013 pfu (plaque-forming units). The library contains a mixture of 3.1 x 109 individual clones, representing the entire obtainable repertoire of 12-mer peptide sequences that express random twelve-amino-acid sequences. Extensively sequencing the naive library has revealed a wide diversity of sequences with no obvious positional biases.
The E. coli host strain ER2738 (a robust F+ strain with a rapid growth rate) (New England Biolabs) was used for M13 phage propagation. The A498 and HK-2 cells were cultured in DMEM supplemented with penicillin, streptomycin, and 10% fetal bovine serum. Cells were harvested when subconfluent, and the total number of cells was counted using a hemocytometer.
In Vitro Panning
A498 cells were taken as the target cells, and HK-2 as the absorber cells for a whole-cell subtractive screening from a phage display 12-peptide library. Cells were cultured in DMEM with 10% FCS at 37degC in a humidified atmosphere containing 5% CO2. HK-2 cells were washed with PBS and kept in serum-free DMEM for 1 h before blocking with 3 mL blocking buffer (BF, PBS + 5% BSA) for 10 min at 37degC. Approximately 2 x 1011 pfu phages were added and mixed gently with the blocked HK-2 for 1 h at 37degC. Cells were then pelleted by centrifuging at 1000 rpm (80 g) for 5 min. HK-2 and phages bound to these cells were removed by centrifugation. Those phages in the supernatant were incubated with the BF-blocked A498 cells for 1 h at 37degC before cells were pelleted again. After that, the pelleted cells were washed twice with 0.1% TBST (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% Tween-20) to remove unbound phage particles. A498 cells and bound phages were both incubated with the E. coli host strain ER2738. Then, the phages were rescued by infection with bacteria while the cells died. The phage titer was subsequently evaluated by a blue plaque-forming assay on agar plates containing tetracycline. Finally, a portion of purified phage preparation was used as the input phage for the next round of in vitro selection.
For each round of selection, more than 1.5 x 1011 pfu of collected phages were used. The panning intensity was increased by prolonging the phage incubation period with HK-2 for 1.25 h or 1.5 h, shortening the phage incubation with A498 for 45 min and 30 min in the second and third rounds individually, and increasing washing with TBST for 4 times and 6 times in the second and third round individually.
Sequence Analysis of Selected Phages and Peptide Synthesis
After three rounds of in vitro panning, 60 blue plaques were randomly selected and their sequences were analyzed with an ABI Automatic DNA Analyzer (Shanghai Sangon Corp). A primer used for sequencing was 5'-CCC TCA TAG TTA GCG TAA CG-3' (-96 gIII sequencing primer, provided in the Ph.D.-12 Phage display peptide library kit). Homologous analysis and multiple sequence alignment were done using the BLAST and Clustal W programs to determine the groups of related peptides.
Cell-Based ELISA with Phage
A498 and HK-2 were cultured in DMEM with 10% FCS at 37degC in a humidified atmosphere containing 5% CO2, and the cells were seeded into 96-well plates (1 x 105 cells/well) overnight. Cells were then fixed on 96-well plates by 4% paraformaldehyde for 15 min at room temperature until cells were attached to the plates. Triplicate determinations were done at each data point. Selectivity was determined using a formula as follows [11]: Selectivity = ODM13 - ODC1/ODS2 - ODC2. Here, ODM13 and OD C1 represent the OD values from the selected phages and control phages binding to A498 cells, respectively. OD S2 and ODC2 represent the OD values from the selected phage and control phage binding to the control (HK-2 cell line), respectively.
Immunocytochemical Staining and Immunohistochemical Staining of Phage M13
Before staining with phage M13 [12], the cells in the different groups (A498 and HK-2) were cultured on coverslips and fixed with acetone at 4degC for 20 min. Then, about 1 x 1011 pfu of phage M13 diluted in PBS were added onto the coverslips and incubated at 4degC overnight. Coverslips were then washed for five times with TBST. The coverslips were blocked by H2O2 (3% in PBS) at room temperature for 510 min. After being washed by PBS for 5 min at 37degC, the coverslips were incubated with normal sheep serum for 20 min at 37degC. Subsequently, the coverslips were incubated overnight at 4degC with a mouse anti-M13 phage antibody at a dilution of 1:5000. The next day, the coverslips were rinsed for three times (10 min for each rinse) in PBS and incubated with a secondary antibody for 1 h at room temperature. Afterward, the coverslips were rinsed three times (5 min for each rinse) in PBS. The bound antibody was visualized using DAB. The coverslips were rinsed for three times (5 min for each rinse) using running tap water before staining by hematoxylin and eosin. Finally, the coverslips were rinsed for 10 min with running tap water before dehydration and mounting.
Frozen sections of human renal tissues with and without tumors were also prepared. The steps of immunohistochemical staining were similar to those for immunocytochemical staining described above. Instead of the selected phage clone M13, PBS and a nonspecific control phage with same titers were used for negative controls. The study protocol was reviewed and approved by the Institutional Review Board and Ethic Committee of the First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-Sen University (NO.2011-137), and oral or written informed consent was obtained from all subjects prior to enrollment in the study.
Peptide Synthesis and Labeling
The ZT-2 peptide (QQPPMHLMSYAG) translated from the selected M13 phage DNA sequence and nonspecific control peptide (EAFSILQWPFAH) were synthesized and purified by Shanghai Bioengineering Ltd. Fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-conjugated peptides were also produced by the same company.
Peptide Competitive Inhibition Assay for Characterization of Specific Phage Clones
The in vitro blue-plaque forming assay was performed to observe the competitive inhibition effect of ZT-2 peptide with its phage counterparts (M13). A498 cells were cultured in a 12-well plate overnight and then preincubated with blocking buffer to block nonspecific binding at 4degC for 30 min. The synthetic peptide (0, 0.0001, 0.001, 0.01, 0.1, 1 or 10 mM) was diluted in PBS and incubated with cells at 4degC for 1 h, and then incubated with 1 x 1011 pfu of phage M13 at 4degC for 1 h. The bound phages were recovered and titered in ER2738 culture. The phages binding to A498 cells were evaluated by blue plaque-forming assay, and the rate of inhibition was calculated by the following formula: Rate of inhibition = (number of blue plaques in A498 incubated with PBS - number of blue plaques in A498 with ZT-2 peptide)/number of blue plaques in A498 incubated with PBS x 100%. Nonspecific control phages (a synthetic peptide corresponding to an unrelated phage picked randomly from the original phage peptide library) were used as negative controls.
Immunofluorescence Microscopy and Image Analysis
Immunofluorescence microscopy was used to study the affinity of synthetic peptide (ZT-2) binding to A498 and renal carcinoma. A498 and HK-2 were digested with 0.25% trypsin and plated on coverslips overnight. Cells were washed three times with PBS and fixed with acetone at 4degC for 20 min before analysis. ZT-2 peptide labeled with FITC was incubated with cells. PBS and control peptides labeled with FITC were used as negative controls. After being washed for three times with PBS, the slips were observed using a fluorescence microscope.

Results
Specific Enrichment of A498 Cell-Bound Phages
Phages specifically bound to human A498 cells were identified through three rounds of in vitro panning. In each round, the bound phages were rescued and amplified in E. coli for the following round of panning, while the unbound phages were removed by washing with TBST. After the third round of the in vitro selection, the number of phages recovered from A498 cells increased 100-fold (Table 1). However, the number of phages recovered from HK-2 control cells decreased. The output/input ratio of phages recovered after each round of the panning was used to determine the phage recovery efficiency. These results indicated an obvious enrichment of phages specifically binding to A498 cells.
Verification of In Vitro Specific Binding by Cell-Based ELISA
A cellular ELISA was used to identify the affinities for the twenty selected phages binding to A498. To assess selectivity, the affinities of each phage binding to A498 cells and to the control HK-2 were compared. These phage clones bound more effectively to A498 cells compared with PBS and HK-2 control groups. Furthermore, the ZT-2 clone appeared to bind most effectively to A498 cells than the other clones (Figure 1). Therefore, we further analyzed the phage M13 and its displaying peptide ZT-2.
Figure 1
Evaluation by cell-ELISA of the binding selectivity of twenty phage clones. The selectivity values of five higher phage clone (ZT-2, ZT-4, ZT-8, ZT-9, and ZT-16), calculated by the formula mentioned in the text, were 3.15, 2.90, 2.95, 2.80, and 3.05, respectively. Therefore, clone ZT-2 appeared to bind more effectively than the other clones.
Affinity of the Phage M13 to A498 Cells and Renal carcinoma Tissues
To confirm the binding ability of the selected phage toward target A498 cells, the phage clone M13 (clone ZT-2) was isolated, amplified and purified for immunochemical assay. The HK-2 cell line, composed of human nontumor renal tissues, was included as a negative control. The interaction of the M13 phage and target cells (A498) was evaluated by immunocytochemical staining. A498 cells bound by the phage M13 were stained brown in contrast to the HK-2 cells. Negative results were also obtained when A498 cells bound with unrelated phage clone. However, A498 cells bound with phage clone ZT-2 were stained brown distinctively, demonstrating that ZT-2 was able to bind specifically to A498 cells (Figure 2). Subsequently, immunohistochemical stain was performed to observe the specific binding of the phage clone ZT-2 toward human renal carcinoma tissues. The cells in A498 tumor tissue sections when bound with phage clone ZT-2 were stained green fluorescence distinctively. When A498 tumor tissue sections bound by unrelated phage clone or the normal renal tissue sections when bound with phage clone ZT-2 showed negative staining. It is thus clear that the phage clone ZT-2 was able to bind specifically to A498 cells (Figure 3).
Figure 2
Immunocytochemical staining of A498 and control cells when bound with phage ZT-2. Cell-bound phages were detected using anti-M13 phage monoclonal antibody, secondary antibody, and ABC complex. The cells were stained with diaminobenzidine (DAB). (A) shows control cell (B) shows immunocytochemical staining of A498 cells when bound with phages without exogenous sequences (wild-type phage) (C) shows immunocytochemical staining of A498 cells when bound with unrelated phage (D) shows immunocytochemical staining of A498 cells when bound with phage ZT-2. Amplification x 200.
Figure 3
Immunohistochemical staining of renal carcinoma and nontumorous renal tissue sections when bound with ZT-2 peptide-fluorescein isothiocyanate. To investigate if the free ZT-2 peptide maintained its binding affinity to renal carcinoma cells, we made a synthetic peptide ZT-2 (QQPPMHLMSYAG) labeled with fluorescein isothiocyanate. (A) Immunohistochemical staining of renal carcinoma tissues when bound with phage ZT-2-FITC. The specific binding sites on tumor cells fluoresced green (B) Immunohistochemical staining of nontumorous renal tissues when bound with phage ZT-2 (C) a negative control section stained with random peptide-fluorescein isothiocyanate in renal carcinoma tissues. Magnification x 200.
Competitive Inhibition Assay
A peptide-competitive inhibition assay was performed to discover whether the synthetic peptide ZT-2 and the corresponding phage clone competed for the same binding site. When the synthetic peptide ZT-2 was pre-incubated with A498 cells, phage ZT-2 binding to A498 cells decreased in a dose-dependent manner. When the peptide ZT-2 concentrations increased, the titer of phages recovered from A498 cells was decreased and the inhibition was increased gradually. When the concentrations of peptide ZT-2 increased above 5 mM, the inhibition reached a flat phase. The control peptide (EAFSILQWPFAH) had no effect on the binding of the phage ZT-2 to A498 cells (Figure 4).
Figure 4
Competitive inhibition of binding of the phage ZT-2 to A498 cells by the synthetic peptide ZT-2 QQPPMHLMSYAG. The average inhibition rates at different concentrations of the peptide are shown. When the concentration of the peptide ZT-2 reached more than 0.001 mM, a significant inhibition occurred.

Discussion
Targeting specific ligand binding on specific tumor antigens is an efficient way to increase the selectivity of therapeutic targets in clinical oncology and helpful for the early detection and therapy of RCC. Tumor cells often display certain cell surface antigens such as tumor-associated antigens or tumor-specific antigens in high quantity, which are different from the antigens on normal tissues. To develop more biomarkers for the diagnosis of RCC, we used peptide phage display technology to identify potential molecular biomarkers of A498 carcinoma cells. After panning for three rounds, 20 clones were selected for further characterization. First, a cell-based ELISA assay was used to confirm the specific binding of the phage clones to A498 cells in vitro. ZT-2 was the best candidate phage clone with the highest specificity. Second, immunocytochemical and immunohistochemical staining were performed to confirm the selectivity of the phage ZT-2 to bind to A498 cells. Third, the results of the competitive inhibitory assays suggest that the peptide displayed by the phage M13-ZT-2, not other parts of this phage, can bind to the renal carcinoma cell surface. Under the same conditions, the normal renal cell line HK-2 did not show significant fluorescence when stained with ZT-2 peptide-FITC, which confirmed the targeting of ZT-2 to be A498 cells.
Monoclonal antibodies have become the most rapidly expanding class of drugs for treating kidney cancer, but poor tumor penetration, bone marrow toxicity and high immunogenicity of these antibodies have been limited in clinical applications [13,14]. Compared with monoclonal antibodies, peptide ligands, which have the advantages of rapid tissue penetration, faster blood clearance, easy incorporation into certain delivery vectors and low immunogenicity are being pursued as targeting moieties for the selective delivery of radionuclides cytokines, chemical drugs, or therapeutic genes to tumors [15]. This effect may open up diagnostic procedures and therapeutic options for the patient. Identification of the cancer cell receptors that binds the ZT-2 peptide would allow further improvement of the peptide for potential clinical use.
These preliminary experiments provide evidence that the ZT-2 peptide may be specific to A498 and therefore it would be useful for diagnosis of renal carcinoma or delivery of an antitumor therapeutic agent. Studies are continuing to identify the cellular receptors responsible for peptide binding and to apply the peptide to clinically relevant samples.
