[Abstract, Introduction, Methods, Results, Discussion]

Identification of KRAP-expressing cells and the functional relevance of KRAP
to the subcellular localization of IP3R in the stomach and
kidney. KRAS-induced actin-interacting protein (KRAP), originally identified as one of the deregulated genes expressed in colorectal cancer, participates under physiological conditions in the regulation of systemic energy homeostasis and of the exocrine system. We have recently found that KRAP is a molecule associated with inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor (IP3R) and is critical for the proper subcellular localization of IP3R in the liver and the pancreas. However, the expression of KRAP and its precise function in other tissues remain elusive. In this study, we aimed to identify the KRAP-expressing cells in mouse stomach and kidneys and to examine the relevance of KRAP expression in the regulation of IP3R localization in these tissues. In the stomach, double immunohistochemical staining for KRAP and IP3R demonstrated that KRAP was expressed along with the apical regions in the mucous cells and the chief cells, and IP3R3 was dominantly co-localized with KRAP in these cells. Furthermore, IP3R2 was also co-localized with IP3R3 in the chief cells. It is of note that the proper localization of IP3R3 and IP3R2 in the chief cells and of IP3R3 in the mucous cells were significantly abrogated in KRAP-deficient mice. In the kidneys, KRAP was expressed in both the apical and the basal regions of the proximal tubular cells. Intriguingly, KRAP deficiency abrogated the localization of IP3R1 in the proximal tubular cells. Finally, co-immunoprecipitation study in the stomachs and the kidneys validated the physical association of KRAP with IP3Rs. These findings demonstrate that KRAP physically associates with IP3Rs and regulates the proper localization of IP3Rs in the mucous cells and the chief cells of the stomach and in the proximal tubular cells of the kidneys.

Introduction
Three inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor (IP3R) subtypes, IP3R1,
IP3R2, and IP3R3, are differentially expressed among tissues (1-5) and function as the Ca2+ release channel on
endoplasmic reticulum membranes (6-10).
IP3R is regulated by many intracellular modulators, phosphorylation by kinases,
and associated proteins (11-15).
KRAS-induced actin-interacting protein (KRAP) was originally identified as
one of the deregulated expression gene in the colorectal cancer cell line, HCT116 (16). The previous studies using
KRAP-knockout (KRAP-KO) mice demonstrate that KRAP
participates in the regulation of systemic energy homeostasis (17) and of exocrine system (18). Among the adult mouse tissues, KRAP
is ubiquitously expressed, with high levels in the pancreas, liver, and brown adipose
tissues, and KRAP localizes in the restricted apical regions of the liver parenchymal cells
and of the pancreatic exocrine acinar cells (19). Our recent findings indicate that KRAP associates with IP3R to
regulate its proper subcellular localization in the mouse liver and the pancreas (20) as well as in immortalized cultured
cell lines (21). Despite these
advances, it remains largely unknown which cell types express KRAP among the other tissues
including stomach and kidneys.
Herein, we performed immunohistological analysis and identified the exact KRAP-expressing
cells in the stomach and the kidneys, and demonstrated that KRAP plays critical role in the
regulation of the precise subcellular localization of IP3R in the mucous and the
chief cells of the stomach and in the proximal tubular cells of the kidneys.

Materials and methods
Animals
All animals used in this study were treated in accordance with the guidelines of Fukuoka
University. KRAP-knockout mice were generated as described previously (17).
Immunohistochemical staining
Immunohistochemical staining was performed as described previously (19,20). Specific signals were detected by using rabbit polyclonal
anti-KRAP antibody (19), mouse
monoclonal anti-ZO-1 antibody (ZYMED), mouse monoclonal anti-IP3R3 antibody
(610313) from BD Transduction Laboratories, rabbit polyclonal anti-IP3R2
antibody (AB3000) from Millipore, and rabbit polyclonal anti-IP3R1 antibody
(ab5840) from Abcam.
Immunoprecipitations and western blotting
Immunoprecipitations and western blotting were performed as described previously (19,20).

Results
Localization of KRAP protein in the adult mouse stomach
To examine the cellular distribution of KRAP protein in the adult mouse tissues, we
performed immunohistochemical staining by using anti-KRAP antibody. In the stomach, strong
KRAP immunoreactivity was restricted to the pit regions of gastric glands (Fig. 1A), whereas significant expression
of KRAP was not detected in the muscularis mucosae beneath the gastric glands (Fig. 1A, arrows). The specificity of KRAP
expression in the stomach was confirmed by using KRAP-KO tissue as a
control (Fig. 1B). In the pit region
of the gastric gland, where columnar surface mucous cells mainly exist (22), KRAP was localized beneath the
apical membranes of the mucous cells (Fig.
1C). In the base region of the gastric glands, where zymogenic chief cells mainly
exist, coronal plane of deeper gastric glands showed that KRAP was restricted to the
apical regions of the chief cells (Fig. 1D,
arrowheads), whereas KRAP was not detected in the parietal cells (Fig. 1D, asterisks). The distinction
between the chief and the parietal cells was validated by ZO-1 staining as described
(23), indicating that KRAP was
expressed in the ZO-1-positive chief cells but not in the ZO-1-negative parietal cells
(Fig. 1E).
KRAP co-localized with IP3R in the stomach
Since we previously reported that KRAP associates with particular subtypes of
IP3R in the liver and the pancreas (20), we examined whether KRAP in the stomach is also co-localized
with IP3R. Double-immunostaining of the stomach for KRAP and IP3R3
revealed that KRAP was co-localized with IP3R3 in the apical regions of both
the chief cells (Fig. 2A, arrows) and
the mucous cells (Fig. 2B, arrows).
Of note, IP3R2 co-existed with IP3R3 in the chief cells (Fig. 2C, arrow) but not in the parietal
cells (Fig. 2C, asterisks).
Furthermore, IP3R2 was not detected in the mucous cells (Fig. 2D, arrows). These results indicated
that KRAP was co-localized with IP3R2 and IP3R3 in the chief cells
and with IP3R3 in the mucous cells.
Impaired localization of IP3R in the KRAP-deficient chief cells and the
mucous cells
We addressed the functional relevance of KRAP to the proper localization of
IP3R by using KRAP-KO mice. IP3R3 was located in
the apical region of the chief cells (Fig.
3A, arrow) and of the mucous cells (Fig. 3C, arrows) in the wild-type (WT) mouse stomach, whereas the restricted
localization of IP3R3 appeared to be diminished in the KRAP-KO
stomach (Fig. 3B, arrow; 3D, arrows).
Furthermore, IP3R2 was detected in both the chief cells (Fig. 3E, arrows) and the parietal cells
(Fig. 3E, asterisks) in the WT
stomach, whereas the localization of IP3R2 in the KRAP-KO
stomach was impaired in the chief cells (Fig. 3F, arrows) but not in the parietal cells (Fig. 3F, asterisks). Thus, KRAP plays critical role in the
regulation of the proper localization of IP3R2 and IP3R3 in the
chief cells and of IP3R3 in the mucous cells.
KRAP expression and its contribution to the localization of IP3R1 in the
proximal tubules of the mouse kidney
To examine the cellular distribution of KRAP protein in the adult mouse kidneys, we
performed immunohistochemical staining by using anti-KRAP antibody. The specificities of
the signals were validated by comparing the immunoreactivities of WT and
KRAP-KO mouse tissues. In the WT kidneys, intense immunoreactivities
were observed in the renal proximal tubules (Fig. 4A) but not in the renal distal tubules (data not shown). On the other
hand, significant immunoreactive signal was not detected in the proximal tubules in the
KRAP-KO mice (Fig.
4B). Taken together, these results indicate that KRAP was exactly expressed in
the proximal tubules. The proximal tubules were identified by the presence of the
brush-border stained with phalloidin (Fig.
4A and B). Immunostaining in the proximal region showed that KRAP was accumulated
beneath the brush-border (Fig. 4A,
arrows) and KRAP was also detected in the basolateral actin bundles (Fig. 4A, arrowheads). We next examined
which subtypes of IP3R, IP3R1, IP3R2, and
IP3R3, expressed in the proximal tubular cells, revealing that IP3R1
(Fig. 4C) but not IP3R 2
or IP3R3 (data not shown) was detected in the beneath the brush-border and in
the basolateral actin bundles. Finally, we addressed the functional relevance of KRAP
expression in the proximal tubular cells to the regulation of IP3R
localization. It is of note that the restricted localization of IP3R1 detected
in the WT mouse kidney (Fig. 4C) was
disturbed in the KRAP-KO mouse kidney (Fig. 4D). Thus, KRAP plays critical role in the regulation of the
proper localization of IP3R1 in the proximal tubular cells.
KRAP interacts with IP3R1 in the kidneys and with IP3R3 in the
stomach
As described above, immunohistochemical signals for particular IP3R subtypes
in the KRAP-KO mouse kidneys or the stomach were abrogated, leading us to
check the expression levels of IP3R between the WT and KRAP-KO
mouse tissues. Normal expression levels of IP3R1 and IP3R3 were
detected in the KRAP-KO mouse kidney and the stomach, respectively,
compared with the WT mouse tissues (Fig.
5A), suggesting that mislocalizations but not deregulated expressions of
IP3R occur in the KRAP-KO mouse kidneys and the stomach.
Next, to examine the physical association of KRAP with IP3R, we performed
co-immunoprecipitations by anti-KRAP antibody in the kidneys or the stomach, in which we
could not evaluate the specific association of IP3R2 with KRAP due to lack of
IP3R2-specific antibody available for western blotting. In the preparations
from the WT mouse tissues, KRAP precipitates IP3R1 and IP3R3 in the
kidney and the stomach, respectively (Fig.
5B). The specificity of co-immunoprecipitations of IP3R was confirmed
by using KRAP-KO mouse tissue as a control (Fig. 5B). Thus, KRAP physically interacts
with IP3R1 in the kidneys and with IP3R3 in the stomach.

Discussion
In this study, we demonstrated that KRAP protein expression and the subcellular
localization was restricted beneath the apical and/or basolateral membranes in specific cell
types of the stomach and the kidneys, in which KRAP physically associated with particular
IP3R subtype(s). In the KRAP-KO mouse stomach and the kidneys,
the polarized localization of IP3R was impaired, indicating that KRAP plays
critical roles in the regulation of the proper subcellular localization of IP3R
in the stomach and the kidneys.
Notably, KRAP as well as IP3R3 proteins were polarized beneath the apical
membranes facing the gastric gland lumen and were absent in the parietal cells (Fig. 1), suggesting an association of these
proteins with chief cell functions including pepsinogen secretion (22-24). From this view point, KRAP
expression and the localization beneath the apical membranes of the pancreatic acinar cells
(19), another type of zymogen
cells, may suggest a similar role for KRAP in the stomach and the pancreas. Considering the
fact that KRAP physically interacts with IP3R to regulate its proper localization
in these tissues, stomach (Figs. 2,
3 and 5) and pancreas (20), and that double-knockout of IP3R2 and IP3R3 in mice
revealed a failure in secretory function in the pancreas (25), KRAP seems to be involved in the exocrine systems. Actually,
the pancreatic acinar cells in KRAP-KO mice showed an increased amount of
zymogen granules, although they seemed to maintain the proper physiological agonist-induced
exocytosis (18). Thus, exact
functional relevance of KRAP and its interaction with IP3R to the exocrine
systems in the pancreas and the stomach should await future studies.
It is of note that KRAP was restricted to both the apical region and the basolateral region
of the proximal tubular cells of the kidneys (Fig. 4), and that KRAP physically associated with IP3R1 in the kidneys
(Fig. 5). Furthermore, our previous
study showed that KRAP was distributed along the bile canaliculi of hepatocytes and
underneath the apical membrane of pancreatic acinar cells (19). All these KRAP localizations in the distinct tissues examined
are restricted to epithelial cell types bearing well-developed cell polarity, cell-cell
junction and microvilli, where transports of various substances between epithelial cells and
extracellular spaces, exocrine space or blood stream occur (22,26-28). Since
KRAP-KO mice displayed profound metabolic disorders after birth without
developmental defects, and certain systemic inter-tissue dysregulations appeared to underlie
the metabolic phenotypes (17), KRAP
might play physiological roles in secretion and/or absorption functions after birth rather
than in developmental events.
Renal proximal tubules serve the reabsorption of the bulk of substances filtered in the
glomeruli and the excretion (26,29). These two opposite transports are
accomplished by the coordinated action of ion channels and transporters located in the brush
border membrane and basolateral membrane (29-31). Thus, the
polarized expression of these membrane proteins is crucial for the function of the proximal
tubules. Based on the findings that KRAP protein possesses characteristic features like
scaffolding protein, such as polarized localization and transporting of IP3R,
potential functional relevance of KRAP to these processes would be suspected.
In conclusion, we identified the exact KRAP-expressing cells in the stomach and the
kidneys, and found that KRAP physically associates with IP3R to regulate its
proper subcellular localization in vivo. Considering the KRAP function as
an IP3R regulator and the importance of KRAP in energy homeostasis in
vivo, further research on the exact relevance of the association between KRAP and
IP3R to the biological phenomena will lead to a better understanding of
physiological metabolic processes.
