[Abstract, Introduction, Results, Discussion, Methods]

Autophagy-related gene 12 (ATG12) is a novel determinant of primary resistance to
HER2-targeted therapies: Utility of transcriptome analysis of the autophagy interactome to guide
breast cancer treatment. The autophagic process, which can facilitate breast cancer resistance to endocrine, cytotoxic, and molecularly targeted agents, is mainly regulated at the post-translational level. Although recent studies have suggested a possible transcriptome regulation of the autophagic genes, little is known about either the analysis tools that can be applied or the functional importance of putative candidate genes emerging from autophagy-dedicated transcriptome studies. In this context, we evaluated whether the constitutive activation of the autophagy machinery, as revealed by a transcriptome analysis using an autophagy-focused polymerase chain reaction (PCR) array, might allow for the identification of novel autophagy-specific biomarkers for intrinsic (primary) resistance to HER2-targeted therapies. Quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR)-based profiling of 84 genes involved in autophagy revealed that, when compared to trastuzumab-sensitive SKBR3 cells, the positive regulator of autophagic vesicle formation ATG12 (autophagy-related gene 12) was the most differentially up-regulated gene in JIMT1 cells, a model of intrinsic cross-resistance to trastuzumab and other HER1/2-targeting drugs. An analysis of the transcriptional status of ATG12 in > 50 breast cancer cell lines suggested that the ATG12 transcript is commonly upregulated in trastuzumab-unresponsive HER2-overexpressing breast cancer cells. A lentiviral-delivered small hairpin RNA stable knockdown of the ATG12 gene fully suppressed the refractoriness of JIMT1 cells to trastuzumab, erlotinib, gefitinib, and lapatinib in vitro. ATG12 silencing significantly reduced JIMT1 tumor growth induced by subcutaneous injection in nude mice. Remarkably, the outgrowth of trastuzumab-unresponsive tumors was prevented completely when trastuzumab treatment was administered in an ATG12-silenced genetic background. We demonstrate for the first time the usefulness of low-density, autophagy-dedicated qRT-PCR-based platforms for monitoring primary resistance to HER2-targeted therapies by transcriptionally screening the autophagy interactome. The degree of predictive accuracy warrants further investigation in the clinical situation.

INTRODUCTION
Although molecular drugs that specifically target one or several members of the HER signaling
network can affect the expression and/or activation status of the HER2 oncoprotein, accumulating
evidence suggests that the actual repercussions of HER2-targeting drugs (e.g., the
anti-HER2 monoclonal antibody trastuzumab or the dual HER1/HER2 tyrosine kinase inhibitor lapatinib)
for tumor growth inhibition are closely related to the ability of these drugs to efficiently impede
specific signaling pathways downstream of HER2 [1-8]. The identification of these pathways and whether they are
operative before, during, and/or after treatment with HER2-inhibiting drugs might enable individual
therapeutic decisions to be based on tumor biology rather than on basic histopathological data alone
[9-23]. Autophagy (from
the Greek autos, itself, and phagein, to eat) is a constitutive
catabolic pathway that mediates both non-specific and targeted sequestration of cellular organelles
and other macromolecules, which permits the degradation of cellular components in lysosomes and the
recycling of bioenergetic metabolites [24-26]. The activation of autophagy might constitute a molecular
mechanism that, beyond HER2 expression status in breast carcinoma cells, may accurately reflect the
reliance of HER2 gene-amplified breast carcinomas on HER2-driven signaling [27-29].
Previous studies have linked autophagy to both tumor-suppressive (i.e.,
autophagy defects that predispose individuals to tumor development) and tumor-promoting functions
(i.e., autophagy activation promotes survival under stress, including cytotoxic
chemotherapy) [30-35].
Of note, HER2 signaling and responsiveness to trastuzumab appear to dynamically interact with both
the tumor-suppressive and tumorigenic roles of autophagy. The loss of ATG6/Beclin1,
one of the earliest characterized mammalian autophagy genes that suggested a tumor suppression
function for autophagy in certain mouse models of mammary oncogenesis [36-39], has been suggested to contribute to
HER2 gene amplification as well as to alterations in PI3K and
PTEN, two crucial downstream effectors of HER2 [40]. Because the main predictors of trastuzumab activity in both pre-clinical and clinical
settings are HER2 gene amplification and activation of the PI3K pathway, defined as
PTEN loss and/or PIK3CA mutation [41-44], the loss of ATG6/Beclin1
might function as a positive predictor of the tumor response to HER2-targeted therapies. Defective
autophagy can therefore lead to enhanced cell death of HER2-positive cancer cells bearing competent
apoptosis or senescence pathways upon challenge with HER2 inhibiting drugs [28]. However, we have added trastuzumab to the growing list of molecularly targeted
therapeutics that activate the pro-survival function of autophagy as part of their mechanism of
action [27]. Autophagic cell death, also referred to as
active cell death II [APDC II], has been suggested to occur in response to extreme autophagic
degradation triggered upon exposure to several cancer therapies [45-47], but it is not an obligatory outcome of
trastuzumab-activated autophagy in a trastuzumab-responsive model of HER2
gene-amplified breast carcinoma cells. Our studies additionally confirmed that the hyperactivation
of basal autophagy was causally related to the acquisition of secondary resistance to trastuzumab
[27]. Thus, "protective autophagy" causally
enabled HER2 gene-amplified breast carcinoma cells to optimally grow for several months in the
presence of clinically relevant concentrations of trastuzumab. The exploration of the cytoprotective
effects of autophagy in breast cancer cells subjected to the pharmacologically mediated depletion of
growth factor receptor signaling by mono-HER1 (i.e., gefitinib, cetuximab),
mono-HER2 (i.e., trastuzumab), and dual HER1/HER2 (i.e.,
lapatinib) inhibitors has confirmed that enhanced autophagic activity can contribute to more
efficient maintenance of cancer cell resistance to HER targeting drugs [48-51]. However, a crucial aspect of this
process that has remained unexplored is the possibility that HER2 gene-amplified
breast carcinoma cells might also exploit the cytoprotective role of autophagy to escape from
HER2-targeted therapies ab initio.
It is well recognized that the autophagic process is mainly regulated at the post-translational
level. However, a growing body of evidence has started to suggest that autophagy might also be
regulated at the transcriptional level. We now have several methods and tools for the analysis of
the autophagic flux and post-translational modifications of autophagy proteins [52]. Unfortunately, little is known about the analysis tools that
can be applied to explore changes in the expression of autophagy genes or about the functional
importance of putative candidate genes emerging from autophagy-dedicated transcriptome studies. In
this context, we first assessed the utility of an autophagy-focused polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
array to identify novel autophagy-specific gene biomarkers for intrinsic (primary) resistance to
trastuzumab in HER2 gene-amplified breast cancer cells that naturally exhibit
bona fide primary resistance to HER-targeted therapies [12, 13, 17, 53-55].
Second, using molecular biology approaches we unambiguously validated whether the autophagy genes
differentially expressed in trastuzumab-refractory breast carcinoma cells functionally predicted the
primary response to the growth-inhibitory and anti-tumoral effects of trastuzumab. When employing
pre-clinical models of trastuzumab-refractory HER2-overexpressing breast cancer cultures and
xenografts, we were able to confirm that the transcriptional screening of the autophagy interactome
can accurately identify autophagic pathway genes that operate as a primary mechanism of trastuzumab
resistance in breast carcinoma cells.

RESULTS
Autophagy-focused PCR arrays indicate ATG12 as a candidate gene for primary (inherent) resistance
to trastuzumab. We first explored whether there is a programmed series of genetic events that
control the autophagic flux that could accompany de novo refractoriness to
trastuzumab in HER2 gene-amplified breast carcinoma cells. RNAs from
trastuzumab-responsive SKBR3 cells, a widely employed in vitro tumor model
characterized by naturally occurring HER2 gene amplification, HER2 receptor protein
overexpression, and HER2-dependency for cell proliferation and survival [18, 56, 57], and trastuzumab-refractory JIMT1 cells, a HER2 gene-amplified cell
line established from a ductal carcinoma pleural metastasis of a 62-year-old patient who did not
respond to trastuzumab treatment ab initio [53-55], were evaluated by quantitative real-time PCR
(qRT-PCR) to evaluate the expression of 84 key genes involved in autophagy (Fig. 1). When we imposed a two-fold change in mRNA expression level as the
cut-off requirement to determine significant regulatory effects on autophagy-related genes, the
autophagy suppressor BAK1 (BCL2-antagonist/killer 1;
|3-fold), the chaperone HSP90AA1 (Heat Shock Protein 90 kDa alpha
[cytosolic], class A member 1; |6-fold), the mTOR-related negative regulator of
autophagy AKT1 (|6-fold), and the endosomal/lysosomal membrane
protein-coding gene CLN3 (Ceroid-Lipofuscinosis, Neuronal 3;
|6-fold) were identified as down-regulated in trastuzumab-unresponsive JIMT1 cells compared
to trastuzumab-responsive SKBR3 cells. The metabolic master rheostat protein PRKAA2
(AMP-activated Protein Kinase catalytic subunit alpha-2; |3-fold), the
retinoblastoma-related senescence/autophagy marker CDKN2A/p16
(cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 2; |3-fold), the autophagy stimulator
DAPK1 (Death-Associated Protein Kinase 1; |6-fold), the
multifunctional cytokine TGFb1 (Transforming Growth Factor-b1;
13-fold), and the essential autophagy gene ATG12 (Autophagy-related 12 homolog
(S. cerevisiae); |11-fold) were significantly up-regulated in
trastuzumab-refractory JIMT1 cells. Trastuzumab exposure, while incapable of influencing the
proliferation of JIMT1 cells, slightly enhanced the differential overexpression of the
autophagy-related genes PRKAA2, CDKN2A/p16, DAPK1
and ATG12 (Fig. 1).
Figure 1
Analysis of autophagy genes in trastuzumab-refractory breast cancer cells
Left. Total RNA from trastuzumab-sensitive SKBR3 and trastuzumab-refractory
JIMT-1 cells was characterized in technical triplicates using the Autophagy RT2 Profiler
PCR Array as per the manufacturer's instructions (SABiosciences; http://www.sabiosciences.com/rt_pcr_product/HTML/PAHS-084A.html). Representative scatter
plots of the difference (>= 2-fold; green and red symbols indicate downregulation and
upregulation vs. expression levels in SKBR3 cells, respectively) in relative
transcript abundance of 84 key genes involved in autophagy are shown. Grey symbols denote the
fold-change results to be validated with a sufficient number of biological replicates
[i.e., fold-change results may have greater variations if the p-value >
0.05, or the p-value for the fold-change is either unavailable or relatively high (p > 0.05)]
or that are uninterpretable because the gene's average threshold cycles were either not
determined or were greater than the defined cut-off value (default 35) in both samples.
Total. The transcript abundance of selected autophagy-related genes were calculated
using the delta Ct method and presented as fold-change vs. basal expression in trastuzumab-sensitive
SKBR3 cells.
ATG12 is differentially up-regulated in HER2 gene-amplified breast carcinoma cells that exhibit
primary (inherent) resistance to trastuzumab. To exclude JIMT1 cell line-specific effects and to
further confirm that the differential overexpression of the ATG12 gene might
correlate with breast cancer cell phenotypes of primary (inherent) resistance to trastuzumab, we
took advantage of the ROCK online interface, a publicly accessible portal that enables the rapid
integration of breast cancer functional and molecular profiling datasets [58]. We analyzed the transcriptional profile of the ATG12 gene
across the Adai (GSE1090) gene expression dataset, which includes 56 breast cancer cell lines, and
across the Neve's gene expression data set, which includes 54 widely used breast cancer cell
lines [59]. The HER2-positive breast cancer cell lines were
classified as trastuzumab-sensitive or trastuzumab-refractory based on the data from the literature.
We then compared the normalized expression data for ATG12 among
trastuzumab-sensitive (blue dots in Fig. 2)
and trastuzumab-refractory (red dots in Fig. 2) cell lines. When the expression status of ATG12 was interrogated in the
Adai data set, an increasing trend in mean ATG12 mRNA expression values was
observed in the trastuzumab-refractory group, which proved to be almost statistically significant (P
= 0.051; Fig. 2). This trend reached statistical significance
when analyzing the differences in ATG12 gene expression between the
trastuzumab-refractory and the trastuzumab-sensitive groups in the Neve's data set (P=0.010;
Fig. 2).
Figure 2
Differential expression of ATG12 in trastuzumab-responsive and trastuzumab-resistant breast
cancer cell lines
Distribution of ATG12 gene expression in trastuzumab-responsive and
trastuzumab-resistant breast cancer cell lines across the Adai data set (top) and
the Neve's data set (bottom).
Small hairpin RNA-driven stable knockdown of ATG12 sensitizes JIMT1 cells to trastuzumab and
eliminates cross-resistance to HER1/HER2 tyrosine kinase inhibitors in vitro. To molecularly
establish a causal role of ATG12-driven autophagy in the de novo resistance of
HER2 gene-amplified breast cancer cells to trastuzumab, we employed a
lentivirus-mediated stable knockdown of the ATG12 gene. To control for any
off-target effects of short hairpin (sh)RNA transduction, control (negative) lentiviral particles
were also used strictly in parallel. First, we determined if the expression of ATG12 was
significantly silenced in JIMT1 cells that were stably transduced with
ATG12-shRNAs. Lysates were produced from JIMT1 cell cultures stably expressing shRNAs that were
designed to recognize and reduce the expression of ATG12 as well as from JIMT1 cells stably
transduced with an empty vector (control shRNA). Immunoblotting analyses confirmed that ATG12
protein expression was reduced to almost undetectable levels (>95% reduction) in JIMT1 cells
that were lentivirally transduced with ATG12 shRNAs compared to parental cells transduced with empty
vector (see Ref. 60). All subsequent experiments were performed with these stable cell lines, which
were termed control-shRNA/JIMT1 and ATG12-shRNA/JIMT1.
MTT-based cell viability assays were performed to evaluate the ability to reduce cell growth in
JIMT1 cells before and after the stable knockdown of ATG12. Non-transduced JIMT1
parental cells, control-shRNA/JIMT1 cells, and ATG12-shRNA/JIMT1 cells were treated with various
concentrations of trastuzumab for five days. We failed to obtain half-maximal inhibitory
concentrations (IC50) in both the parental and control-shRNA/JIMT1 cells, thus confirming
the robust resistance of JIMT1 cells to trastuzumab-mediated cytotoxicity (Fig. 3). ATG12-shRNA/JIMT1 cells, however, demonstrated a significantly enhanced
sensitivity to trastuzumab at concentrations as low as 1 mg/mL. Thus, the insignificant
levels of cell viability loss induced by trastuzumab in both the parental and control-shRNA/JIMT1
cells (i.e., 1% reduction at 1 mg/mL trastuzumab and 8% reduction at 100
mg/mL trastuzumab, respectively) were augmented by up to 25-fold (i.e., from
25% reduction at 1 mg/mL trastuzumab to 33% reduction at 100 mg/mL trastuzumab,
respectively) in ATG12-shRNA/JIMT1 cells (Fig. 3).
Figure 3
Impact of shRNA-driven genetic ablation of ATG12 on the efficacy of the anti-HER2 monoclonal
antibody trastuzumab (Herceptin) in vitro
The metabolic status of JIMT1 parental cells, control shRNA-JIMT1 cells, and ATG12 shRNA-JIMT1
cells treated with graded concentrations trastuzumab was evaluated using MTT-based cell viability
assays, followed by the generation of dose-response graphs depicting the % of untreated cells
(untreated control cells = 100% cell viability). The results are presented as the means
(columns) and 95% confidence intervals (bars) of three independent
experiments performed in triplicate. [n.s. not significant; * P < 0.05]
Because we recently demonstrated that the IC50 values for the small molecule HER1/HER2
TKIs gefitinib, erlotinib, and lapatinib were drastically higher (up to 40-fold) in
trastuzumab-refractory JIMT1 cells than in trastuzumab-sensitive SKBR3 cells [17], we sought to evaluate whether the specific knockdown of ATG12 was sufficient
to eliminate the inherent cross-resistance of JIMT1 cells to HER targeting drugs. Remarkably, the
IC50 values for gefitinib, erlotinib, and lapatinib were drastically reduced as a result
of ATG12 gene silencing (Fig. 4). The
gefitinib IC50 value decreased from 8.0+-1.5 mmol/L and 7.8+-1
mmol/L in parental and control-shRNA/JIMT1 cells, respectively, to 1.85+-0.7
mmol/L in ATG12-shRNA/JIMT1 cells (i.e., [?]4-fold decrease). The
erlotinib IC50 value decreased from 5.0+-1.0 mmol/L and 4.5+-1.0
mmol/L in parental and control-shRNA/JIMT1 cells, respectively, to 0.5+-0.2
mmol/L in ATG12-shRNA/JIMT1 cells (i.e., [?]10-fold decrease). The
lapatinib IC50 value decreased from 7.0+-1.0 mmol/L and 7.5+-1.0
mmol/L in parental and control-shRNA/JIMT1 cells, respectively, to 0.7+-0.4
mmol/L in ATG12-shRNA/JIMT1 cells (i.e., [?]10-fold decrease). Of note,
the sensitizing effect of ATG12 knockdown was restricted to HER targeting drugs
because the growth inhibitory responses of ATG12-shRNA/JIMT1 cells to various cytotoxic molecules
(i.e., doxorubicin, 5-fluorouracil, cisplatin, vinorelbine, and paclitaxel)
remained unaltered (data not shown).
Figure 4
Impact of shRNA-driven genetic ablation of ATG12 on the efficacy of HER1/2-tyrosine kinase
inhibitors in vitro
Left panels. The metabolic status of JIMT1 parental cells, control shRNA-JIMT1
cells, and ATG12 shRNA-JIMT1 cells treated with graded concentrations of erlotinib,
gefitinib, and lapatinib was evaluated using MTT-based cell viability assays, followed by the
generation of dose-response graphs depicting the % of untreated cells (untreated control cells =
100% cell viability). The results are presented as the means (columns) and 95%
confidence intervals (bars) of three independent experiments performed in
triplicate. Right panels. The degree of sensitivity of JIMT1 parental cells,
control shRNA-JIMT1 cells, and ATG12 shRNA-JIMT1 cells to HER1/2-targeting drugs is
illustrated by bars representing mean IC50 values in each cell line. Error bars show
standard deviations. [n.s. not significant; ** P < 0.005]
ATG12 knockdown reduces tumor growth and sensitizes trastuzumab-resistant xenografts to
trastuzumab. The effects of the specific ATG12 gene knockdown on tumor growth were
investigated in vivo in a JIMT1 xenograft animal model (Fig. 4). Compared to the untreated control group (2266+-228 mm3), nine
weeks of treatment with trastuzumab (5 mg/kg/week) failed to prevent tumor growth by the parental
JIMT1 cells; the mean tumor size reached volumes as large as 1556+-298 mm3 in the
presence of trastuzumab. However, compared to the mean xenograft tumor size in both the
shRNA-control and trastuzumab-treated groups, the mean tumor size of the ATG12-shRNA/JIMT1 cells was
smaller (858+-121 mm3). Remarkably, when the ATG12-shRNA/JIMT1 xenografts were
treated with trastuzumab weekly, the mean tumor size was drastically reduced to 46+-21
mm3, thus demonstrating that the sensitivity of trastuzumab-refractory JIMT1 xenografts
to trastuzumab increased dramatically when the cells were depleted of the autophagy driver ATG12.
Whereas trastuzumab treatment reduced the tumor volume of ATG12-expressing JIMT1 xenografts 63 days
post-injection by approximately 30%, trastuzumab exposure reduced the tumor volume of ATG12-silenced
JIMT1 xenografts by an impressive 98% over the same treatment time (Fig. 5).
Figure 5
Impact of shRNA-driven genetic ablation of ATG12 on the efficacy of
trastuzumab in vivo
Shown are the mean tumor volumes (+-SD) in JIMT1 and ATG12 shRNA-JIMT1 xenograft-bearing
nude mice following injection with trastuzumab (5 mg/kg/week) for nine weeks. Data from control
shRNA-JIMT1 cells were superimposable with those obtained in JIMT1 parental cells and have been
omitted for simplicity.

DISCUSSION
We have previously reported that HER2-overexpressing breast cancer cells that have been
chronically exposed to the anti-HER2 monoclonal antibody trastuzumab exhibit a bona
fide up-regulation of the basal autophagic activity that efficiently operates to protect
breast cancer cells from the growth-inhibitory effects of trastuzumab [27]. Our working model proposed that enhanced autophagosome formation and the
subsequent catabolic function of autophagy flux actively contribute to the survival of
HER2-dependent breast cancer and facilitate the rapid development of resistance to trastuzumab in
cells that initially respond to treatment. Consequently, the blockade of the autophagic machinery
should significantly help to prevent or retard the appearance of acquired (secondary) resistance to
trastuzumab in HER2 gene-amplified breast carcinoma cells [27, 28]. However, whether HER2-positive
breast cancer cells might also exploit the cytoprotective role of autophagy to escape from
HER2-targeted therapies ab initio was unexplored. Taking advantage of the
HER2 gene-amplified JIMT1 cell line [17,
53-55], which
inherently exhibits cross-resistance to multiple HER1/2 inhibiting drugs, we have provided evidence
for the first time that one of the ubiquitin-like conjugation systems that is requisite for the
formation of autophagic vesicles (i.e., ATG12) [61-66] is a novel determinant of primary resistance
to HER1/2-targeted therapeutics.
In this study, we first analyzed the correlation between primary resistance to trastuzumab and
the expression status of several genes that regulate distinct molecular events leading to autophagic
vesicle formation [61-63, 67-70],
including its initiation (e.g., beclin1) and maturation by the ATG12
(e.g., ATG12 and ATG5) and LC3 (e.g., ATG4B) conjugation systems.
We demonstrated that DAPK1, TGFB1, and ATG12 are
the three pro-autophagic genes with the highest differential up-regulation (>5-fold) between
trastuzumab-unresponsive JIMT1 cells and trastuzumab-sensitive SKBR3 cells. The death-associated
protein kinase-1 (DAPK1) induces autophagy and apoptosis through independent mechanisms [71, 72]. Autophagy induced
by DAPK-1 overexpression can be attenuated by knocking down expression of the microtubule-associated
protein MAP1B [72], suggesting that the interaction of DAPK-1
with MAP1B, which in turn is capable of interacting with LC3, might be responsible for the
DAPK-1-driven induction of autophagy. The extremely pleiotropic behavior of DAPK-1 [73] also suggests that transcriptional programs influenced by
DAPK-1 might also impact the propensity of cells to undergo autophagy. TGFb, the
best-characterized inducer of the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), has been shown to
induce the accumulation of autophagosomes and the autophagic conversion of LC3 while enhancing the
degradation of long-lived proteins [74, 75]. TGFb-induced autophagy appears to contribute to the growth inhibitory
and tumor suppressive effects of TGFb, in conjunction with other anti-proliferative pathways
downstream of TGFb signaling. Of note, DAPK-1 is commonly silenced in human cancers by
methylation [73] and has tumor and metastasis suppressor
properties. DAPK-1- and TGFb-driven autophagy, therefore, can be viewed as dual-model
paradigms in which autophagy may contribute to tumor suppression early in the development of a
subset of HER2 gene-amplified breast carcinomas; however, when these tumors somehow bypass the tumor
suppressor activity of DAPK-1 and TGFb, autophagy would later allow the selection of
invasive, mesenchymal cells with an enhanced expression of autophagic and stem cell markers. In
breast cancer, the undifferentiated CD44+CD24-/low antigenic state
commonly attributed to breast cancer subpopulations with cancer stem cell (CSC) properties is highly
enriched with EMT transcriptional factors and mesenchymal markers [76-82]. Of note, our group has recently confirmed
that a) CD44+CD24-/low mesenchymal subpopulations are intrinsically
unresponsive to trastuzumab [83]; b) the absence or presence
of the CD44+CD24-/low mesenchymal immunophenotype is closely related to
the inherent sensitivity or refractoriness of HER2-gene amplified breast carcinoma cells to
trastuzumab [83], respectively; and c) the impairment of the
autophagic flux by genetic means (i.e., ATG12 gene silencing) drastically decreases
the number of trastuzumab-unresponsive cells bearing CD44+CD24-/low
cell surface antigens and appears to impede the ontogeny of generating the CSC-like
CD44+CD24-/low mesenchymal phenotype by preventing the full acquisition
of a post-EMT status [60]. These findings, together with our
current description that a) ATG12 overexpression is a new molecular biomarker for primary resistance
to trastuzumab and b) inherent unresponsiveness to trastuzumab can be switched to sensitivity simply
by depleting ATG12 notably delineates a new scenario in which primary resistance to HER2-targeted
drugs can be understood in terms of HER2 gene-amplified breast carcinoma cells that
are intrinsically capable of generating highly autophagic, undifferentiated
CD44+CD24-/low antigenic states. Importantly, when investigating the
relationship between the biological roles of autophagy in trastuzumab-mediated cancer therapy, we
concluded that ATG12-related autophagic flux specifically functions as a protective cellular
phenotype against HER-targeting drugs. Whereas the IC50 values for the small-molecule
HER1/2 TKIs erlotinib, gefitinib, and lapatinib were drastically reduced by up to 10-fold in
response to ATG12 gene silencing, the knockdown of ATG12 failed to
alter the sensitivity of JIMT1 cells to multiple cytotoxics, including doxorubicin, 5-fluorouracil,
cisplatin, vinorelbine, and paclitaxel (data not shown). Autophagy addiction underlying the primary
resistance of HER2 gene-amplified breast cancer cells to HER1/2 targeting therapies may depend, at
least in part, on the previously unrecognized ability of autophagy to regulate a
trastuzumab-unresponsive CD44+CD24-/low mesenchymal cellular state.
Autophagy-addicted, trastuzumab-unresponsive JIMT1 cells significantly upregulated the expression
of PRKAA2, the catalytic subunit of the master regulator of cellular energy
homeostasis AMPK [84-86]. Cancer cells are largely unable to change their metabolic programming as a result of
their oncogenic alterations [87-91], which may underlie the sensitivity of HER2-overexpressing breast cancer cells
to growth factor receptor inhibitors, including trastuzumab and lapatinib. Indeed, the
lapatinib-induced activation of AMPK and the consequent inhibitory effects on protein synthesis and
de novo fatty acid biogenesis are lethal to HER2 gene-amplified
breast carcinoma cells that are "addicted" to glycolysis [92, 93]. Lapatinib treatment seems to
deprive cells of energy not only via the down-regulation of glycolysis but also by
further triggering an entire cascade of metabolic events mediated by the activation of AMPK. AMPK
activation ultimately results in downstream events that conserve cellular energy by inhibiting fatty
acid synthesis while activating fatty acid oxidation as an alternative source of energy.
Intriguingly, the ability of AMPK to coordinate the adaptive response of cellular bioenergetics to
ATP depletion may also be responsible, at least in part, for the reduced sensitivity of
HER2 gene-amplified breast cancer cells to HER-targeting drugs. Given that AMPK
modulates the activity of crucial regulators of autophagy such as mTOR, increased expression of AMPK
accompanied by the downregulation of key negative regulators of mTOR (i.e., AKT1)
may aid trastuzumab-refractory breast cancer cells in mounting a protective autophagic response from
a molecular perspective. The chronic elevation of AMPK and mTOR activities likely results in a shift
toward catabolism, which can inherently prepare HER2-overexpressing cells to
accommodate the acute bioenergetic crisis imposed by HER-targeting drugs. This AMPK-related
metabolic scenario is likely associated with the occurrence of autophagic, trastuzumab-refractory
CD44+CD24-/low mesenchymal immunophenotypes because treatment with
metformin, a partial inhibitor of autophagy due its limited ability to strongly reduce intracellular
ATP [94-96], is
sufficient to efficiently kill EMT-related CD44+CD24-/low cells and
restore trastuzumab efficacy in HER2 gene-amplified breast cancer cells with
primary resistance to HER1/2-targeting therapies [18, 97-101].
A priori autophagic flux is a crucial feature that determines the efficacy of
HER2-directed drugs ab initio. Targeting autophagy addiction may be helpful in
circumventing the primary resistance to HER2 targeting therapies and may potentiate the efficacy of
HER2 targeting strategies currently in use in HER2-positive breast cancer patients. While ATG12 is
not currently a druggable target, emerging autophagy inhibitors (e.g., Lys05,
Spautin-1) that target other components of the autophagic vesicle assembly [102-104] may prove to be an effective
means to circumvent primary resistance to and potentiate the efficacy of HER2-targeting strategies
currently in use in HER2-positive breast cancer patients. All human clinical trials currently
exploring autophagy inhibition as a therapeutic strategy employ chloroquine or its derivative
hydroxychloroquine due to the long track record of safety in human patients [105-107]. However, recent studies suggest
that hydroxychloroquine is not a potent autophagy inhibitor at clinically tolerable doses and that
chloroquine-mediated lysosomal dysfunction sensitizes breast cancer cells to chemotherapy
independent of autophagy [108]. Despite this unfavorable
scenario, we are currently exploring whether chloroquine-induced inhibition of the final step in the
autophagic pathway sensitizes autophagy-addicted [109],
trastuzumab-refractory HER2-positive breast cancer cells to the growth inhibitory activity of
trastuzumab. Preliminary evidence appears to support a valuable pre-clinical scenario in which
lysosomotropic autophagy inhibitors (e.g., chloroquine and its derivatives) [105] could prove to be more effective and autophagy-specific when
combined with molecularly targeted drugs (e.g., trastuzumab) whose mechanisms of
action involve HER2 internalization and recycling [110-113] via chloroquine-targeted lysosomal
pathway-dependent degradation.
Using very simple bioinformatics tools on well-established cell-based breast carcinoma models, we
demonstrated for the first time the usefulness of low-density, autophagy-dedicated qRT-PCR-based
platforms for monitoring primary trastuzumab resistance by transcriptionally screening the autophagy
interactome. The autophagy qRT-PCR tool used on trastuzumab-refractory breast cancer cells allowed
for the rapid and accurate identification of differentially expressed autophagy genes (e.g.,
ATG12) that were causally associated with intrinsic resistance to the anti-tumoral effects
of the molecularly targeted anti-HER2 drugs. While our current ability to accurately measure basal
autophagic flux or determine whether autophagy is activated or inhibited in patient samples
(i.e., immunohistochemical- or immunoblotting-based detection of autophagic
markers, such as LC3 and SQSTM1/p62) is very limited and of unproven utility in human patients, the
method of analysis described here or other similar technologies involving human autophagy-dedicated
cDNA microarrays [114], by allowing the simultaneous
monitoring of the expression level of multiple autophagy genes, might provide a practical method for
analyzing the impact of the autophagy interactome in the in vivo response of breast
cancer tissues to anti-cancer therapies. The degree of accuracy that constitutive activation of
autophagy, as revealed by a transcriptome analysis using PCR arrays, can provide to predict
trastuzumab efficacy warrants further investigation in the clinical situation.

METHODS
Drugs
The EGFR (HER1)-Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitor (TKI) gefitinib (ZD1839; Iressa(r)) was
kindly provided by AstraZeneca (AstraZeneca PLC Headquarters, 15 Stanhope Gate, W1K 1LN, London,
UK). The EGFR (HER1) TKI erlotinib (Tarceva(r)) was a kind gift from Roche
Pharmaceuticals (Neuilly sur Seine, France). The dual HER1/HER2-TKI1 lapatinib (GW572016;
Tykerb(r)) was kindly provided by GlaxoSmithKline (GSK), Corporate Environment,
Health & Safety (Brentford, Middlesex TW8 9GS, UK). Stock solutions of gefitinib, erlotinib,
and lapatinib (10 mmol/L) were prepared in DMSO and stored in aliquots in the dark at
-20degC until use. Trastuzumab (Herceptin(r)) was kindly provided by
Hospital Universitari de Girona Dr. Josep Trueta Pharmacy (Girona, Spain). Trastuzumab was
solubilized in bacteriostatic water for injection containing 1.1% benzyl alcohol (stock solution at
21 mg/mL), stored at 4degC and used within 1 month. For experimental use, all experimental
agents were prepared fresh from stock solutions and were diluted with cell growth medium. Control
cells were cultured in media containing identical concentrations (v/v) as that used for test cells.
The vehicle solutions had no noticeable influence on the proliferation of experimental cells.
Cell lines and culture conditions
JIMT1 cells were obtained from the German Collection of Microorganisms and were routinely grown
in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (DMEM, Gibco(r) Cell Culture
Systems) containing 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS, Bio-Whittaker, Inc.), 1%
L-glutamine, 1% sodium pyruvate, 50 U/mL penicillin, and 50 mg/mL streptomycin. The cells
were maintained at 37degC in a humidified atmosphere with 5% CO2. SKBR3 breast
cancer cells were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC) and were routinely grown
in Improved MEM (IMEM; Biosource International) supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% L-glutamine, 1%
sodium pyruvate, 50 U/mL penicillin, and 50 mg/mL streptomycin. Cells were maintained at
37degC in a humidified atmosphere of 95% air and 5% CO2. Cells were screened
periodically for Mycoplasma contamination.
Lentiviral transduction
Pre-packaged lentiviral particles that either encoded a non-targeting shRNA (negative shRNA,
sc-108080) or sequences specifically targeting the human ATG12 gene were purchased
from a commercial provider (Santa Cruz Biotechnology). For viral infection of JIMT1 cells, the
regular medium was replaced with culture medium containing 5 mg/mL polybrene (Santa Cruz
Biotechnology, sc-124220). JIMT1 cells were then exposed to lentiviruses for 48 h. Because the
lentiviral shRNA particles also encode a puromycin resistance gene for transduction selection, the
cells were then washed and grown in culture medium containing 10 mg/mL puromycin
dihydrochloride (Sigma, P9620) for an additional 72 h. The JIMT1 cells were allowed to recover and
proliferate for at least 1 week before any experimental procedures and were then analyzed. To
monitor the lentiviral transduction efficiency and transgene expression for the duration of the
experiment, we incubated additional subsets of JIMT1 cells with lentiviral particles encoding a
green fluorescence protein (GFP) reporter (sc-108084). Transduction efficiency (> 90%) was
obtained as the ratio of the number of GFP-positive cells to the total number of cells from five
random visual fields from three independent culture experiments.
Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR)
Total RNA was extracted from cell cultures using a Qiagen RNeasy kit and Qiash redder columns
according to the manufacturer's instructions. One microgram of total RNA was
reverse-transcribed into cDNA with a Reaction Ready(tm) First Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit
(SABiosciences) and applied to the Human Autophagy RT2 Profiler(tm) PCR Array (PAHS-084,
96-well format) following the SABiosciences RT-PCR manual. Plates were processed in an Applied
Biosystems 7500 Fast Real-Time PCR System Applied Biosystems, using automated baseline and threshold
cycle detection. Data were interpreted with SABiosciences' web-based PCR array analysis
tool.
Metabolic status assessment (MTT-based cell viability assays)
Cell viability was determined using a standard colorimetric MTT (3-4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl-2,
5-diphenyl-tetrazolium bromide) reduction assay. Exponentially growing cells were harvested by
trypsinization, seeded at a concentration of ~2.5 x 103 cells/200 mL/well
into 96-well plates, and allowed to attach overnight. The medium was then removed, and fresh medium
along with various concentrations of HER1/2 targeting drugs were added to the cultures as specified.
Control cells without drugs were cultured in parallel using the same conditions with comparable
media changes. Drugs were not renewed during the entire period of cell exposure. Following treatment
(5 days), the medium was removed and replaced with fresh drug-free medium (100 mL/well), and
MTT (5 mg/mL in PBS) was added to each well at a 1/10 volume. After incubation for 2-3 h at
37degC, the supernatants were carefully aspirated, 100 mL of DMSO were added to each
well, and the plates were agitated to dissolve the crystal product. The optical density (OD) was
measured at 570 nm in a multi-well plate reader (Model Anthos Labtec 2010 1.7 reader). The cell
viability effects resulting from the exposure of cells to HER1/2-targeting drugs were analyzed as
percentages of the control cell absorbances, which were obtained from control wells treated with
appropriate concentrations of the agents' vehicles, which were processed simultaneously. For
each treatment, cell viability was evaluated as a percentage using the following equation:
(OD570 of treated sample/OD570 of untreated sample) x 100. Breast
cancer cell sensitivity to HER1/2-targeting drugs was expressed in terms of the concentration of
drug required to decrease cell viability by 50% (IC50 value). Because the percentage of
control absorbance was considered to be the surviving fraction of cells, the IC50 value
was defined as the concentration of HER1/2-targeting drug that produced a 50% reduction in the
control absorbance (by interpolation), respectively. The degree of sensitization to HER1/2-targeting
drugs by shRNA-driven silencing of ATG12 was evaluated by dividing the
IC50 values of the JIMT1 parental cells by those obtained in control-shRNA/JIMT1 cells or
ATG12-shRNA/JIMT1 cells.
Xenograft studies
To produce xenografts, approximately 5 x 106 JIMT1 parental cells,
control-shRNA/JIMT1 cells or ATG12-shRNA/JIMT1 cells were injected subcutaneously into the dorsal
flanks of female athymic nude mice (four to five weeks old, 23 to 25 g; Harlan Laboratories,
France). The animals were randomized into two groups, with five animals in each group: control
(vehicle) and trastuzumab-treated. Trastuzumab (5 mg/kg) was administered intraperitoneally (i.p.)
once per week. The mice were weighed once per week after dosing, the tumor sizes were measured daily
with electronic calipers, and the tumor volumes were calculated with the following formula: volume
(mm3) = length x width2 x 0.5. The experiments were approved by
the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) of the Institut d'Investigacio
Biomedica de Bellvitge (IDIBELL; Animal Use Protocol #6302 authorized by the Animal
Experimental Commission of the Catalan Government, Barcelona, Spain).
