[Abstract, Introduction, Methods, Results, Discussion, Mixed]

Estrogen receptor splice variants as a potential source of false-positive estrogen receptor status in breast cancer diagnostics. It is well established that only estrogen receptor (ER)-positive tumors benefit from hormonal therapies. We hypothesized that a subgroup of breast cancer patients expresses estrogen receptor a (ERa), but fails to respond to hormonal therapy due to the expression of a non-functional receptor. We analyzed a series of 2,658 ERa-positive HER2-negative breast tumors for ERa and progesterone receptor (PR) status as determined by mRNA expression and for their molecular subtypes (Luminal type vs Basal type, assessed by BluePrint(tm) molecular subtyping assay). In addition, we assessed the recurrence risk (low vs high) using the 70-gene MammaPrint(tm) signature. We found that 55 out of 2,658 (2.1 %) tumors that are ERa positive by mRNA analysis also demonstrate a Basal molecular subtype, indicating that they lack expression of estrogen-responsive genes. These ERa-positive Basal-type tumors express significantly lower levels of both ERa and PR mRNA as compared to Luminal-type tumors (P < 0.0001) and almost invariably (94.5 %) have a high-risk MammaPrint(tm) profile. Twelve of the MammaPrint(tm) genes are directly ERa responsive, indicating that MammaPrint(tm) assesses ERa function in breast cancer without considering ERa mRNA levels. We find a relatively high expression of the dominant negative ERa splice variant ERD7 in ERa-positive Basal-type tumors as compared to ERa-positive Luminal-type tumors (P < 0.0001). Expression of the dominant negative ERa variant ERD7 provides a rationale as to why tumors are of the Basal molecular subtype while staining ERa positive by immunohistochemistry. These tumors may lack a functional response to estrogen and consequently may not respond to hormonal therapy. Our data indicate that such patients are of MammaPrint(tm) high recurrence risk and might benefit from adjuvant chemotherapy.  Electronic supplementary material The online version of this article (doi:10.1007/s10549-013-2648-1) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

Introduction
The female hormone estradiol (E2) is a potent mitogen for estrogen receptor a (ERa)-positive breast cancers. Hence, ERa protein levels, as determined by immunohistochemistry (IHC), are strongly predictive for response to endocrine therapies [1]. 75 % of all breast cancers express ERa, but not all tumors that express this steroid receptor respond to hormonal therapies. ERa is a member of the nuclear hormone receptor gene family that regulates transcription in a hormone-dependent fashion through sequence-specific DNA binding [2]. Indeed, ERa binding sites are found proximal to many genes and consequently estrogen stimulation of breast cancer cells leads to significant changes in cellular gene expression [3, 4]. These responsive genes include the progesterone receptor (PR), one of the best-characterized ERa target genes. Hence, the PR is often co-expressed with ERa in breast cancers and PR testing is commonly performed in conjunction with ERa testing to assess hormone receptor status of a breast tumor. However, PR status is not a strong predictor of response to endocrine therapy, indicating that PR expression is not solely controlled by ERa activity [5].
Over a decade ago, the first large-scale gene expression profiling studies in breast cancer demonstrated that breast cancers consist of a number of "intrinsic" or "molecular" subtypes that are characterized by similarities in gene expression patterns [6]. Among these intrinsic subtypes are the "Luminal" and "Basal" tumors, which are thought to represent primarily ER-positive and -negative tumors, respectively. Consistent with this view, it was demonstrated that BluePrint(tm), an 80-gene mRNA expression signature that identifies Luminal and Basal tumors, is significantly enriched in bona fide ER target genes [7]. These data suggest that this intrinsic subtype signature primarily measures the functionality of the ER, as judged by expression of its downstream target genes. As such, this signature also has the potential to identify a subgroup of breast cancer patients who are ERa positive by IHC and/or mRNA expression, but fail to elicit the hormone-induced transcriptional responses that normally result from ER stimulation (ERa target genes "off"; Basal type). Such a scenario would imply that breast cancers having this phenotype express a dysfunctional ERa protein that can nevertheless be detected by IHC.
Several different ERa variant mRNAs have been described in human breast cancer. Almost all of these naturally occurring variants are mRNA splicing variants, in which one or more exons are absent from the ERa mRNA. In most ERa splicing variants, except for variants lacking exon 3 or 4, translation runs out of frame after the site of the splicing variation, leading to a truncated protein [8-12]. Since the antibodies for ERa used in IHC often include those that recognize an epitope encoded by the first exon of the ERa gene [13], such splice variants are likely detected as IHC positive for ERa, even though their function may be different from the normal ERa protein. The functional activity of these variant ERa proteins can be negative, dominant negative, or dominant active on ERa target genes. Dominant negative variants are not only inactive themselves but also inactivate wild-type ERa through heterodimerization. Two variants, the ERD3 and the ERD7 variants, have been described as dominant negative receptor forms in the presence of wild-type ERa [8-12]. The ERD7 mRNA has been reported to be the major alternatively spliced form in most human breast tumors and cancer cell lines [14]. The ERD7 is especially interesting because the hormone-binding domain, the transcription activation function-2 domain, and the dimerization domain are all partially located in exon 7 (Fig. 1). It has been shown that the ERD7 variant has the ability to suppress the E2-dependent transcriptional activation by both wild-type ERa and ERb [14].Fig. 1Organization of the ERa mRNA and functional domains. TAF-1 transcription activation function 1, TAF-2 transcription activation function 2, aa amino acid, bp base pair
According to the guideline recommendations from the American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO) and the College of American Pathologists (CAP) for IHC testing of ERa and PR in breast cancer, it is recommended that ERa assays should be considered positive if there are at least 1 % (weakly) positive tumor nuclei in the sample [13]. This threshold is based on a cut-point analysis correlating IHC scores with outcome in patients treated with adjuvant endocrine therapy alone, where patients with a score correlating to 1-10 % weakly positive cells had a statistically significant better prognosis than patients with scores correlating with <1 % positive cells [15]. However, Iwamoto et al. have shown recently that only a minority of the borderline (1-9 % positive nuclei) IHC ERa-positive tumors are of the Luminal subtype (as identified by the PAM50 classifier [16]) and that most of these borderline ERa-positive samples are of the Basal molecular subtype [17].
Here, we identify in a large cohort of molecular profiled breast cancers a subgroup of around 2 % of breast tumors that are ERa positive by mRNA expression analysis, but are of the Basal molecular subtype. These tumors express significantly lower levels of both ERa and PR mRNA than the Luminal-type tumors and have almost invariably (94.5 %) a high-risk MammaPrint(tm) profile. Furthermore, we show that these tumors have relatively high levels of the dominant negative ERD7 splice variant, in agreement with the notion that they may lack a functional response to estrogen and consequently may not respond to hormonal therapy.

Patients and methods
Patient samples and molecular profiling
A total of 3,527 breast cancer patient specimens were retrospectively analyzed. This selection was based on the availability of MammaPrint(tm), TargetPrint(tm), and BluePrint(tm) molecular profiling results as performed in the Agendia testing laboratories. The ERa status on mRNA levels was determined by TargetPrint, a microarray-based gene expression test, which offers a quantitative assessment of the patient's level of ERa, PR, and HER2 expression [18]. The TargetPrint probe for ERa mRNA detection is located in the 3' UTR region. The ERa, PR, and HER2 TargetPrint score is a value between -1 and 1, where the null cutoff value is calibrated to 1 % IHC ERa-positive cells, as identified in a reference laboratory according to ASCO/CAP guidelines. Tumors are reported ERa or PR positive when the TargetPrint score is above 0, corresponding to >1 % IHC-positive cells [18]. Molecular subtyping was performed using the 80-gene BluePrint(tm) molecular subtyping profile for the classification of breast cancer into Basal type, Luminal type, and ERBB2 type (HER2 positive) molecular subclasses [7]. In addition, the tumors were classified as low risk or high risk for distant recurrence using the 70-gene MammaPrint(tm) signature, a FDA-cleared breast cancer recurrence assay, performed by Agendia Inc. [19].
ERD7 variant analysis
We obtained RNA from 15 ERa-positive Luminal-type tumors and from 12 ERa-positive Basal-type tumors to analyze the relative ERD7 mRNA expression. cDNA was synthesized from 500 ng RNA using SuperScript II Reverse Transcriptase (Invitrogen) with random hexamer primers. The total ERa and ERD7 mRNA expression was determined by qRT-PCR. For total ERa expression, the forward primer was located in exon 1 and the reverse primer in exon 2. For ERD7 expression, the forward primer was located in exon 6 and the reverse primer was designed to specifically detect ERD7 and located partially in exon 6 (12 nucleotides) and partially in exon 8 (14 nucleotides) (Primer sequences in Supplementary Materials). All qRT-PCR reactions were performed in duplicates using SYBR Green reaction mix containing 5ul cDNA. The expression levels were quantified using a reference standard dilution curve. The relative expression of the ERD7 variant was calculated by dividing the ERD7 mRNA expression by the total ERa mRNA expression.
Identification of ERa target genes in the 70-gene MammaPrint(tm) breast cancer signature
The 70 MammaPrint genes were analyzed for ERa binding events within 20 kb from the transcription start site (TSS), representing the most commonly detected window for ER-mediated gene regulation [20]. ERa-binding sites were identified by ChIP-seq analyses [21], using available datasets for the Luminal breast cancer cell line MCF-7 [22] and 2 ER-positive Luminal breast tumor samples (paper in submission; GSE40867). Publically available data on E2-stimulated gene expression were used from [3], where Global Run-On sequencing was applied to assess gene transcription after 0-, 10-, 40-, and 160-min E2 treatment. Only genes with a differential expression as compared to control conditions with a false discovery rate of ~0.1 % were considered as E2 regulated.

Results
ERD7 splice variant expressed in an ERa-positive basal-type breast cancer
We have recently developed an 80-gene signature (BluePrint(tm)) that identifies the three major intrinsic subtypes (Basal, Luminal, and HER2) of breast cancer [7]. Of these 80 genes, 58 are used to identify the Luminal subtype. Importantly, 32 out of these 58 Luminal subtype reporter genes have ERa-binding sites adjacent to the TSS [7]. This indicates that the genes that identify Luminal-type breast cancer are significantly enriched for bona fide ERa target genes and suggests that the Luminal subtype is characterized by tumors that have a functional ERa pathway. Conversely, BluePrint Basal-type tumors would be expected to have either no significant ERa expression or a non-functional ERa pathway; these same bona fide ERa target genes show an inverse expression pattern in Basal-type tumors [7].
Following argumentation as outlined above, one would expect that breast tumors that are ERa positive, but Basal type by BluePrint analysis, would either have a very low level of ERa protein or harbor a defective ERa protein. To test this hypothesis directly, we mined the Agendia database for patients who are ERa positive by TargetPrint, but Basal type by BluePrint molecular subtype analysis. We initially identified a patient (Table 1, patient 1; 60-year-old woman with 9 mm, moderately differentiated, HER2 negative, ER/PR > 90 % by IHC, invasive ductal carcinoma), who had undergone MammaPrint, TargetPrint, and BluePrint tests. She had MammaPrint high-risk result, was ER/PR positive by TargetPrint, but Basal subtype by BluePrint, suggesting that the ERa was present both at the protein (IHC > 90 %) and mRNA levels, but that ERa target genes were not expressed in this tumor (hence Basal type). The tumor was also analyzed using the OncotypeDX(tm) breast cancer assay (Genomic Health Inc.), classifying the tumor as low risk for distant recurrence (Recurrence Score 8, Table 1).
We used the same tumor mRNA sample as was used to perform the MammaPrint, TargetPrint, and BluePrint assays for detailed analysis of the ERa mRNA transcript in this patient. We first PCR amplified the coding sequence of ERa with specific oligonucleotides that span the start codon of ERa at the 5' end and the stop codon at the 3' end (Primer sequences in Supplementary Materials). Agarose gel electrophoresis of the PCR product revealed a smaller DNA fragment next to the expected DNA fragment coding for the open reading frame of ERa. Inspection of the DNA sequence of the smaller product revealed an ERa sequence-lacking exon 7 of the coding sequence (data not shown). This transcript corresponds to the previously reported ERD7, an ERa splice variant that inhibits the function of the normal (wild-type) ERa in a dominant fashion [14].
Frequency of ERa-positive basal-type tumors
To determine the frequency at which ERa-positive Basal-type breast tumors occur, we searched the Agendia database for additional cases. Out of 3,527 cases, we identified 2,658 ERa-positive, HER2-negative breast tumors, as judged by TargetPrint mRNA expression, for which BluePrint intrinsic subtyping data were available. From these 2,658 tumors, 2,603 (97.9 %) were classified as Luminal type and 55 (2.1 %) were classified as Basal type (Table 2). The mean ERa and PR TargetPrint indices for the ERa-positive Basal-type tumors were significantly lower than for the ERa-positive Luminal-type tumors (P < 0.0001).
ERD7 splice variant expression in ERa-positive basal-type breast cancers
We further analyzed an additional 11 of these 55 ERa-positive Basal-type tumors for expression of total ERa as well as the ERD7 variant by qRT-PCR. The specificity of the primer pairs was tested with cDNA from MCF7 breast cancer cells overexpressing either wild-type ERa or ERD7 and the calculated ERD7/total ERa ratio was correlated with ERa protein expression in these cells. The ERa antibody clone 1D5 (Dako) was used for western blot analysis, for which the epitope is located in the N-terminal domain of ERa and therefore recognizes both wild-type ERa and ERD7. We show in these cells that the relative ERD7 levels as measured by qRT-PCR are highly concordant with protein expression (Supplementary Fig. 1).
The average total ERa mRNA expression by qRT-PCR was significantly lower for the 12 analyzed ERa-positive Basal-type tumors compared to 15 randomly chosen ERa-positive Luminal-type tumors (Fig. 2a; P = 0.0019), consistent with the TargetPrint results (Table 2). There was no significant difference in average ERD7 mRNA expression between the ERa-positive Basal-type and Luminal-type samples (Fig. 2b; P = 0.4088). However, the relative ERD7 mRNA expression was significantly higher for the ERa-positive Basal-type group compared to the ERa-positive Luminal-type group (Fig. 2c; P < 0.0001), due to the lower overall ERa mRNA expression in the Basal-type tumors.Fig. 2ERa-positive Basal-type tumors have a relatively high ERD7 expression compared to ERa-positive Luminal-type tumors. a Scatter plot of total ERa mRNA expression analysis by qRT-PCR in ER-positive Basal-type (n = 12) and ER-positive Luminal-type (n = 15) tumors. The qRT-PCR primers are located in exon 1 and exon 2. Points indicate individual tumors; lines indicate mean with SD. b Scatter plot of specific ERD7 mRNA expression analysis by qRT-PCR in ER-positive Basal-type (n = 12) and ER-positive Luminal-type (n = 15) tumors. The qRT-PCR Primers are located in exon 6 (forward) and over the exon 7 splice site (reverse). Points indicate individual tumors; lines indicate mean with SD. c Scatter plot of relative ERD7 expression calculated by dividing the ERD7 mRNA expression with the total ERa mRNA expression in ER-positive Basal-type (n = 12) and ER-positive Luminal-type (n = 15) tumors. Points indicate individual tumors; lines indicate mean with SD. P-values are calculated by unpaired t tests with Welch's correction and are two-tailed
The characteristics of the 12 ERa-positive Basal-type tumors, for which ERD7 splice variant expression was determined, are shown in Table 1. For 8 of the 12 patients, we were able to retrieve the ERa and PR IHC scoring. Based on the ERa IHC, six out of eight (75 %) patients were classified as ERa positive. In two patients, we found a discrepancy between TargetPrint and ERa IHC classification; in one of these patients, the TargetPrint ERa index was just above the ERa-positive threshold (patient 10). The PR IHC was in concordance with the PR classification based on TargetPrint in six of eight patients, and for two patients (patient 6 and 8), a small percentage of PR-positive cells was detected by IHC where the TargetPrint PR index was negative. The HER2 negative status was confirmed by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) in all available cases. All patients (12/12) were stratified as high risk of distant recurrence by the MammaPrint prognostic gene signature.
MammaPrint measures ERa function independent of ERa expression
MammaPrint measures 70 genes that were selected from the entire complement of human genes, but ERa is not among the MammaPrint genes [23]. Nevertheless, we observed that 52 of the 55 (94.5 %) ERa-positive Basal-type tumors were MammaPrint high risk, while only 44.9 % of the ERa-positive Luminal-type tumors were classified as high risk of recurrence (Table 2; P < 0.0001). Since the MammaPrint assay identifies nearly all these ERa-positive Basal-type tumors as high risk, it suggests that the test measures ERa activity independent of the ERa mRNA expression level itself. To investigate this further, we determined how many of the 70 MammaPrint prognosis genes are directly responsive to E2 treatment. For this, a publically available dataset was used that assessed gene expression changes after 10, 40, and 180 min of E2 treatment [3]. We found that 16 MammaPrint reporter genes annotated in the most recent build of the human reference genome sequence are E2 regulated (Fig. 3a). Next, we tested whether these E2-responsive MammaPrint genes can be classified as direct ERa target genes. Using a publically available ChIP-seq dataset [22], the genome-wide chromatin-binding landscape of ERa in MCF7 cells was analyzed for the occurrence of an ERa binding event within 20,000 bp from the TSS of any of the MammaPrint genes. This window was chosen since most ERa-mediated gene regulation is found within this distance from a TSS [20]. Ten out of 16 genes had an ERa binding event within 20,000 bp from the TSS (Fig. 3a), as exemplified for the LPCAT1 locus (Fig. 3a). Importantly, the essential ERa coactivators AIB1 (also known as SRC3) and p300 were also present at this specific binding site, indicating that ERa is likely to be functional here [24]. Furthermore, we confirmed that ERa binding events in E2-regulated MammaPrint genes are also found in 2 ER-positive Luminal human breast tumor samples, for which ERa ChIP-seq data are available (Fig. 3a). In total, 12 out of 16 E2-regulated genes had an ERa-binding site in either MCF7 cells or in the two studied tumors (Fig 3a). Cumulatively, these data indicate that bona fide ERa target genes are enriched in the MammaPrint gene signature, providing a plausible explanation for why the MammaPrint can measure ERa functionality rather than its mere presence, in contrast to other available assays.Fig. 3Functional ERa target genes in MammaPrint 70-gene set. a Pie chart, depicting the proportion of MammaPrint genes, which are affected by E2 treatment. Heat map (right panel) depicts proximal ERa ChIP-seq signal by tag count (blue) as well as relative gene expression values as measured by GRO-seq, after 10, 40, and 160 min of E2 treatment (green-black-red heat map). b Genome browser snapshot, depicting a shared ERa (red), AIB1 (green), and p300 (blue) proximal to the LPCAT1 transcription start site. Chromosome number, genomic coordinates, and tag count are indicated

Discussion
The present study identifies approximately 1 in 50 ER-positive breast cancer patients as Basal molecular subtype. Basal-type breast tumors are characterized by an absence of expression of ERa target genes, which is generally thought to result from the absence of ERa expression [25]. However, the group of tumors identified here is ERa positive on the mRNA level, suggesting that their Basal phenotype is the result of a lack of ERa protein expression or a lack of functionality of the ERa protein present in these tumors. Indeed, we find that these tumors not only express relatively low levels of ERa mRNA but also express a splice variant of ERa-missing exon 7 (ERD7, Fig. 2a, b). This ERa variant has been shown previously to act in a dominant negative fashion, meaning that this variant can inhibit the function of the wild-type ERa protein when co-expressed in the same cell [14]. We note that the absolute levels of ERD7 are comparable in ERa-positive Basal-type versus ERa-positive Luminal-type tumors, but that the relative abundance of ERD7 is higher in the ERa-positive Basal-type tumors (Fig. 2c). We interpret these data as follows: When the levels of wild-type ERa in a breast tumor are high, the inhibitory effects of dominant negative ERD7 are by comparison minor, leaving the cell with considerable ERa activity and thus with a luminal phenotype (Fig. 4, right). In contrast, lower levels of wild-type ERa in the weakly ERa-positive breast tumors are inhibited to a greater extent by the presence of ERD7, leaving the tumor cells with insufficient ERa activity to regulate ERa target gene expression and thus with a Basal phenotype (Fig. 4, left). It remains to be explained why lower levels of ERa result in a relative increase in abundance of the ERD7 splice variant. It is possible that ERa also controls the expression of certain components of the splicing machinery and that low ERa activity therefore results in a different processing of the ERa (and potentially also other) precursor mRNAs.Fig. 4Proposed model by which ERD7 mRNA expression can affect ERa activity in low ERa wild-type expressing tumors (left) and in high ERa wild-type expressing tumors (right)
A clinically relevant question is whether this identified group of ERa-positive Basal-type tumors is likely to respond to hormonal therapy. The finding that ERa target genes are not expressed suggests that the mitogenic responses in such tumors are not driven by E2 and that such tumors would be unlikely to derive significant benefit from hormonal therapy. It was reported by Ellis et al. [26] in a cohort of postmenopausal women with clinical stage II to III ER-positive breast cancer that the single patient in their study with a basal-like intrinsic subtype was resistant to endocrine therapy. While it remains to be formally proven, there are other suggestions in the literature that the presence of ERD7 is associated with a lack of response to tamoxifen. Van Dijk [27] analyzed the relative ERD7 mRNA expression in a group of 21 primary breast tumors from postmenopausal early breast cancer patients treated with adjuvant tamoxifen. It was found that out of eleven ERa mRNA variants tested, only the ERD7 mRNA was significantly differentially expressed between primary breast tumors of patients who developed a tumor recurrence (13/21) and tumors of patients without recurrence (8/21). Tumors from patients with a recurrence expressed on average 24 % ERD7 mRNA (relative to wild-type ERa mRNA expression), while tumors from patients without recurrence expressed on average 9 % ERD7 mRNA [27]. While it may be premature to withhold hormonal therapy from this group of ERa-positive breast cancer patients, as this would require a large randomized outcome study, there are reasons to consider adding chemotherapy to the treatment regimen for these patients. We find that 94.5 % of the ERa-positive Basal-type breast cancer patients are high risk by the MammaPrint assay, making them potential candidates to benefit from chemotherapy based on their high recurrence risk. Moreover, Basal-type breast cancers have been shown to be significantly more responsive to neoadjuvant chemotherapy as compared to luminal breast cancers, again indicating that addition of chemotherapy could be effective in this patient group [7]. The St. Gallen consensus guidelines state that patients with an (borderline) ERa-positive Basal-type tumor are classified as incompletely endocrine responsive [28]. This relative lack of endocrine responsiveness together with a designation of "high risk" of relapse by MammaPrint will contribute to a clinician's recommendation of whether endocrine therapy alone may be sufficient or supplementary chemotherapy may be beneficial for these patients.
Our finding that ERa-positive Basal-type tumors are in general borderline ERa positive on mRNA level is in agreement with the conclusions of Iwamoto et al. who found that most of the 1-9 % IHC ERa-positive tumors show molecular features similar to ERa-negative basal-like tumors [17]. The strength of our study is the high number of cases and therefore the better estimate we can make of the frequency of ERa-positive Basal-type tumors. In addition, we show that a majority of these tumors have a high-risk prognostic profile. One limitation of our study is that we do not have all the clinical information for the entire group of patients which was studied here. For instance, we did not have access to the IHC data for all the patients in this study and had to rely on TargetPrint to assess ERa levels. However, IHC data were available for 8 of the 12 ERa-positive Basal type for which ERD7 expression was determined (Table 1) and showed that 6 of 8 tumors scored clearly positive for ERa protein by IHC.
ERa-positive breast tumors have in general a better prognosis than ERa-negative tumors [29]. In spite of this, the group of ERa-positive Basal-type breast tumors consists nearly exclusively of high-risk patients as judged by the MammaPrint assay (Table 2). Our present data also provide a possible explanation for this finding. In contrast to the OncotypeDX(tm) prognostic signature, the 70-gene MammaPrint(tm) signature does not include ERa [23, 30]. We find that 16 MammaPrint genes are responsive to E2 treatment and that 12 of these are classified as direct ERa targets based on ERa/DNA associations in close proximity to the TSS, indicating that MammaPrint determines ERa activity rather than merely its expression. We believe that this likely explains why the first patient (Table 1, patient 1) having the ERa-positive basal phenotype was characterized by the OncotypeDX assay as "low risk", but "high risk" by MammaPrint and patient 11 also had a discordant risk assessment in these two assays (Table 1). The ERa mRNA is expressed at a relatively high level in these patients, which is a "good prognosis" factor in the OncotypeDX assay. However, MammaPrint identified this tumor as lacking a functional ERa and came to a "high risk" reading.
In conclusion, by combining TargetPrint and BluePrint molecular subtyping analysis, we have identified a subgroup of some 2 % of breast cancer patients who lack ERa function while expressing ERa at the mRNA and protein level. Our data indicate that such patients are frequently at high recurrence risk and might benefit from adjuvant chemotherapy.

Electronic supplementary material
Supplementary Fig. 1
Sensitivity and specificity of the qRT-PCR primer pairs for the quantification of ERD7. a The ERa antibody clone 1D5 (Dako) was used for western blot analysis, for which the epitope is located in the N-terminal domain of ERa and therefore recognizes both wild-type ERa and ERD7 in MCF7 breast cancer cells with stable infection of pMX-vector control, pMX-ERa wild type, or pMX-ERD7. b ERa protein expression in these cells was correlated with the calculated ERD7/total ERa ratio by qRT-PCR using specific primer pairs for ERD7 and total ERa. Overexpression of pMX-ERa wild type leads to a decrease of the ERD7/total ERa ratio, whereas overexpression of pMX-ERD7 increased the ERD7/total ERa ratio comparable to the ratio of protein expression. (TIFF 17356 kb)
Supplementary Materials and Methods (DOCX 11 kb)
