[Abstract, Mixed, Mixed, Discussion]

Aberrant promoter CpG methylation and its translational applications in breast cancer. Breast cancer is a complex disease driven by multiple factors including both genetic and epigenetic alterations. Recent studies revealed that abnormal gene expression induced by epigenetic changes, including aberrant promoter methylation and histone modification, plays a critical role in human breast Carcinogenesis. Silencing of tumor suppressor genes (TSGs) by promoter CpG methylation facilitates cells growth and survival advantages and further results in tumor initiation and progression, thus directly contributing to breast tumorigenesis. Usually, aberrant promoter methylation of TSGs, which can be reversed by pharmacological reagents, occurs at the early stage of tumorigenesis and therefore may serve as a potential tumor marker for early diagnosis and therapeutic targeting of breast cancer. In this review, we summarize the epigenetic changes of multiple TSGs involved in breast pathogenesis and their potential clinical applications as tumor markers for early detection and treatment of breast cancer.

Aberrant Promoter Methylation Silences Critical TSGs in Breast Carcinoma
Although inactivating mutations of TSGs have been well documented in familial breast cancer, the incidence of mutations in sporadic breast cancer is rare. Yet, a large body of evidence has demonstrated that epigenetic aberration is a key player in silencing a variety of TSGs, which triggers breast tumor progression[9]. Identification of an epigenetic gene profile for breast cancer will thus be helpful to elucidate the molecular mechanisms underlying breast cancer pathogenesis.
As shown in Table 1, a series of promoter-methylated key TSGs involved in breast tumorigenesis have been reported, including genes for cell cycle regulation (p16INK4a, p14ARF, p15, 14-3-3s, cyclin D2, p57KIP2) , DNA repair [glutathione S-transferase pi 1 (GSTP1), O-6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase (MGMT), breast cancer 1 (BRCA1), human mutL homolog 1 (hMLH1)], hormone and receptor-mediated cell signaling pathways [estrogen receptor alpha (ERa), progesterone receptor (PR), retinoic acid receptor beta (RARb), Ras association domain family member 1 (RASSF1A), spleen tyrosine kinase (SYK), TGFb receptor II (TGFb RII), high in normal 1 (HIN1), normal epithelial cell-specific 1 (NES1), suppressor of cytokine signaling 1 (SOCS1), secreted frizzled-related protein 1 (SFRP1), WNT inhibitory factor 1 (WIF1)], apoptosis [adenomatous polyposis coli (APC), death-associated protein kinase (DAPK1), hypermethylated in cancer 1 (HIC1), homeobox A5 (HOXA5), TWIST homolog of drosophila (TWIST), target of methylation-induced silencing (TMS1)], cell adhesion and metastasis [cadherin 1 (CDH1), cadherin 13 (CDH13), APC, tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases 3 (TIMP3)], angiogenesis [maspin, thrombospondin 1 (THBS1)], and other processes. These epigenetic changes may lead to chromosomal instability, accumulated mutations in critical cell signaling pathways, ultimately contributing to breast cancer progression. Our group has also identified a series of TSGs silenced or down-regulated by promoter CpG methylation in breast cancer, such as WIF1, phospholipase C delta 1 (PLCD1), CKLF-like MARVEL transmembrane domain containing 5 (CMTM5), CKLF-like MARVEL transmembrane domain containing 3 (CMTM3), opioid binding protein/cell adhesion molecule-like (OPCML), Ubiquitin carboxyl-terminal esterase L1 (UCHL1), deleted in liver cancer 1 (DLC1), interferon regulatory factor 8 (IRF8), and dapper homolog 1 (DACT1), that are involved in breast tumor cell cycle control, apoptosis, and metastasis[10]-[16].

Clinical Implications of Promoter Methylation in Breast Cancer
Understanding the critical roles of promoter CpG methylation-mediated transcriptional repression/silencing in breast cancer led us to consider its potential clinical applications. Here, we further discuss the usage of DNA methylation markers for early cancer detection and prognosis prediction, as well as the application of demethylation drugs in breast cancer therapy.
Aberrant promoter methylation as a marker for early detection and prognosis in breast cancer
Women diagnosed with early-stage breast cancer have a better prognosis and require less severe treatment regimens than those diagnosed with advanced stage diseases. With the development of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and digital mammography, the accuracy of breast cancer detection has distinctly increased. However, current screening methods lack sensitivity and specificity[17], and new methods with higher sensitivity, specificity, and lower invasiveness are urgently required. Using tumor markers thus provides a valuable alternative approach.
In recent years, many studies demonstrated that aberrant DNA methylation has strong potential to serve as a novel tumor marker for early diagnosis and progression evaluation. First, aberrant promoter methylation of a series of TSGs is a common feature of malignancy; compared to gene mutations and copy number alternations, it occurs more frequently as an early event in tumorigenesis. Importantly, different types of tumors present distinctive promoter methylation profiles, which can improve specificity and sensitivity for tumor detection. Second, aberrant promoter methylation patterns can be detected even when they are embedded in an excess amount of normal DNA molecules. Third, techniques required for the detection of methylation patterns, such as methylation-specific PCR (MSR), MethyLight, and quantitative multiplex methylation-specific PCR (QM-MSP), are relatively simple, rapid, non-radioactive, and sensitive.
A number of cancer-specific genes have been found to be frequently methylated in breast cancer. These epigenetic biomarkers show promise for distinguishing between malignant and benign disease or normal tissue[18]-[23]. Further, considering that no single methylated gene was detected in any breast cancer types, it is necessary to use cancer-specific methylation marker panels to screen breast cancer[24]. For example, a three-methylated-gene panel (Cyclin D2, RARb, and TWIST) was successfully used to detect malignant breast cancer cells in ductal fluids[25]. A four-methylated-gene panel (RASSF1A, TWIST, HIN1, and Cyclin D2) with a high level of sensitivity and specificity was used to detect malignant breast tissues[26] as well. Compared to conventional ductal lavage cytology, a nine-methylated-gene panel (RASSF1A, TWIST, HIN1, Cyclin D2, RARb, APC, BRCA1, BRCA2, and p16) was developed to double the sensitivity for breast cancer detection[27].
Cancer-specific methylation can also be extended to assess risk and predict prognosis for breast cancer. For example, frequently methylated RASSF1A and APC, as well as methylated GSTP1 and SFRP1[28],[29], were associated with poor outcome[28],[29]. Recently, subtype-specific methylation markers were used to evaluate optional targeted treatments in breast cancer[30]. Using an array-based methylation assay, Holm et al.[31] uncovered a subtype- specific methylation pattern for distinguishing different breast tumor phenotypes, which will provide more detailed information for predicting breast cancer prognosis.
Additionally, blood-based detection of cancer-specific methylated DNA in breast cancer has shown potential for early detection and prognostic prediction[32]-[35].
Radpour et al.[3] found significant promoter methylation of seven genes [APC, bridging integrator 1 (BIN1), bone morphogenetic protein 6 (BMP6), BRCA1, cystatin 6 (CST6), P16, and TIMP3] in serum and tumor tissues from patients with breast cancer by using MALDI-TOF mass spectroscopy.
Together, these studies show that cancer specific methylation changes in tumor tissues, plasma, and other fluids can be used as tumor markers for risk assessment and early diagnosis of breast cancer. More effective and simplified approaches for detecting methylated genes are being developed to increase the sensitivity and specificity of early detection and prognosis of breast cancer[36]-[38].
Aberrant promoter methylation as therapeutic target for breast cancer
Unlike genetic changes in cancers, gene silencing due to DNA methylation changes can be reversed by pharmacological demethylation. Thus, reactivating epigenetically silenced cancer genes and restoring their tumor suppression functions provide new insight for cancer therapy. Moreover, targeting epigenetic alterations also provides alternative ways for breast cancer preventative care, novel anticancer therapeutics, and drug investigation.
DNA methyltransferase (DNMTs) inhibitors, 5-aza-cytidine (5-Aza-CR) and 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-Aza-dC), are the first discovered epigenetic drugs. These compounds act by incorporating into DNA in place of the natural base, cytosine, during DNA replication, leading to covalent trapping of DNMTs[39]. This causes the depletion of active DNMTs and demethylation of genomic DNA. These reagents have already been approved by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for treatment of a myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS), malignant mesothelioma, preleukemic disease, breast cancer, nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) and other diseases[40]-[43]. Recently, Zebularine, a novel DNMT inhibitor with low toxicity and high selectivity for tumor cells, was reported to reactivate key genes silenced in breast cancer cell lines even at low doses[44]. In addition, other demethylation approaches, including DNMT inhibition via siRNA, ribozymes, and antisense oligonucleotides, have also been proposed but are still in their infancy. Some of these agents have been demonstrated to be promisingly effective in cell culture systems, animal models, and even clinical trials, whereas having little effect on normal cells[45]. These agents include MG98, an antisense oligonucleotide to DNA methyltransferase 1[46],[47], and RG108[48],[49], a novel small molecule that binds to the catalytic site of DNA methyltransferases.
The combination of histone deacetylases inhibitors (HDACIs), such as TSA and phenylbutyrate[50], with DNMT inhibitors is particularly valuable for cancer treatment. Furthermore, loss of estrogen receptor (ER) expression due to aberrant DNA methylation and histone modifications results in resistance to anti-estrogen therapy in breast cancer. Studies showed that combination of 5-azacytidine with TSA could induce re-expression of functional ER, thereby sensitizing ERa-negative breast cancer cells to tamoxifen therapy[15],[52]. Combined with HDACIs, trastuzumab (Herceptin(r)), a humanized monoclonal anti-HER2 antibody, produced a synergistic effect on cell growth repression and apoptosis induction in breast cancer cells[53],[54].
Furthermore, combinations of epigenetic drug treatments with conventional chemotherapeutic reagents or natural dietary ingredients could potentially work synergistically to increase therapeutic effects. A preclinical study has shown that 5-Aza-dC in combination with docetaxel, an anti-mitotic chemotherapeutic regent, could produce synergistic anti-cancer effects on breast cancer lines[55]. 5-Aza-dC combined with either amsacrine or idarubicin also showed promising efficacy. The green tea polyphenol, (-)-epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG), can cause the chromatin structural remodelling of ERa promoter by altering histone acetylation and methylation status, thereby resulting in ERa reactivation. Combined with TSA, EGCG reactivated multiple methylation-silenced TSGs by directly and indirectly inhibiting the enzymatic activities of DNMTs[56]. Dietary sulforaphane (SFN)[57], a histone deacetylase inhibitor, significantly inhibited the viability and proliferation of breast cancer cells but not normal cells in vitro.
Therefore, combined demethylation therapies may offer better therapeutic strategies for breast cancer. For example, clinical trials of trastuzumab combined with HDACI are in progress for locally advanced breast cancer[58], and a phase II breast cancer trial combining valproic acid (VPA) with FEC100 (5-fluorouracil, epirubicin, and cyclophosphamide) is ongoing[59].

Conclusions
In summary, substantial evidence demonstrates that epigenetic alterations, especially promoter CpG methylation of TSGs, play critical roles in breast tumorigenesis. Significant advances have been made for early detection biomarkers, risk assessment, prognostic prediction, and drug development in breast cancer. With the development of new epigenomic techniques and further investigations, a better perspective of the epigenetic profile of breast cancer will soon be revealed.
