[Abstract, Introduction, Methods, Results, Discussion, Mixed]

T Cells Induce Pre-Metastatic Osteolytic Disease and Help Bone
Metastases Establishment in a Mouse Model of Metastatic Breast
Cancer. Bone metastases, present in 70% of patients with metastatic breast cancer, lead to skeletal disease, fractures and intense pain, which are all believed to be mediated by tumor cells. Engraftment of tumor cells is supposed to be preceded by changes in the target tissue to create a permissive microenvironment, the pre-metastatic niche, for the establishment of the metastatic foci. In bone metastatic niche, metastatic cells stimulate bone consumption resulting in the release of growth factors that feed the tumor, establishing a vicious cycle between the bone remodeling system and the tumor itself. Yet, how the pre-metastatic niches arise in the bone tissue remains unclear. Here we show that tumor-specific T cells induce osteolytic bone disease before bone colonization. T cells pro-metastatic activity correlate with a pro-osteoclastogenic cytokine profile, including RANKL, a master regulator of osteoclastogenesis. In vivo inhibition of RANKL from tumor-specific T cells completely blocks bone loss and metastasis. Our results unveil an unexpected role for RANKL-derived from T cells in setting the pre-metastatic niche and promoting tumor spread. We believe this information can bring new possibilities for the development of prognostic and therapeutic tools based on modulation of T cell activity for prevention and treatment of bone metastasis.

Introduction
The role of the immune system in controlling cancer was first hypothesized more than
one hundred years ago [1]. However, the
concept of Immunosurveillance as a response of the adaptive immune system came up
with the proposition of the Clonal Selection Theory by Burnet and the demonstration
that tumor specific antigens in fact exist [1,2]. More recently, immune
selection of malignant cells based on differences on antigen specificities supported
the idea of "immunoediting" [1,3,4]
adding the possibility of a pro-tumoral activity to the previously proposed concept
of immunosurveillance. Once the tumor is "shaped" by the immunoselection mechanisms,
it will be in equilibrium with the host immune system, until it can escape. To
escape, a tumor cell must modify its intrinsic and extrinsic factors [5,6],
favoring its own growth. In fact, extrinisic factors represented by stromal cells,
extracellular matrix and hematopoietic cells [7-10] can be either protective or
pro-tumorigenic.
Regarding the immune system, tumor cells might express co-inhibitory molecules and
secrete cytokines that will subvert the immune response [1,5,11]. Tumor associated macrophages (TAM), for example,
characterized as M2 subtype, can produce a series of cytokines that will favor tumor
growth and lung metastasis [12,13] in response to Th2 cells modulation [14]. When it comes to bone metastasis, although
the role of osteoclasts (a specialized bone macrophage) in creating a permissive
environment for tumor colonization is well known [15,16], the role of T cell in
regulating osteoclasts in bone metastasis and cancer induced bone disease is not
known [17,18]
The presence of T cells in the bone cavity has been well documented. Bone marrow
CD4+ T cells are involved in the control of normal hematopoiesis
[19] and are present in the hematopoietic
stem cell niche [20], which is also occupied
by cancer metastasis [21]. As an active
component of the bone marrow microenvironment [22], CD4+ T cells have also been found to have an impact on
the bone remodeling process through induction or regulation of molecules, such as
RANKL, involved in bone metabolism [23-25]. RANKL, is a pleiotropic molecule expressed
by different cell types and with multiple functions [26,27]. In bone tissue
physiology, RANKL is a key molecule which promotes osteoclast (OC) differentiation
and activation, and its absence in osteoblasts, chondrocytes or osteocytes leads to
abnormal bone formation or remodeling [28,29]. RANKL is also present in
CD4+ T cells after activation [27] and it was shown to be preferentially expressed in Th17 cells [30]. Although, these cells are clearly involved
in the pathogenesis of autoimmune arthritis, and are therapeutic targets in both
experimental and human disease [31,32], no direct role of Th17 cells in bone loss
has been shown until now. Th17 cells have been shown to induce osteoclastogenesis
indirectly, through induction of RANKL expression in osteoblasts and synoviocytes
[30].
Since T cells can "shape" the tumor, orchestrate metastatic colonization to the
lungs, and are active components of the inflammatory osteolytic disease, it seemed
reasonable to ask if T cells from mice bearing a bone metastatic tumor would play
any role in the osteolytic bone disease and/or bone and BM colonization.

Material and Methods
Detection of primary tumor growth and spontaneous metastasis
All animal experiments were in accordance to the Brazilian National Cancer
Institute (INCA) guidelines for animal use in research and approved at CCS
animal committee at Federal University of Rio de Janeiro (license
number IMPPG027). Females BALB/c and BALB/c nude mice were obtained from INCA or
IPEN/CNEN/USP. The tumor lines 67NR and 4T1 were kindly provided by Dr. Fred
Miller from Karmanos Cancer Institute, Detroit, MI [33]. Female BALB/c mice (6-8 weeks old) were inoculated
with 104 cells in the fourth mammary fat pad. Primary tumors maximum
diameter was obtained by ultrasound measurement [34]. Numbers of metastatic cells in LNs and indicated bones were
determined using a clonogenic metastatic assay supplemented with 6-thioguanine.
Presence of metastatic cells was also evaluated by RT-PCR to cytokeratin 19
(CK19), and GAPDH for normalization. To prepare 4T1 soluble tumor-Ag (sAg),
tumor, were dissected, ressuspended in ice cold PBS, filtered through 40 um cell
strainer, disrupted by freezing and thawing 5x, boiled for 10 min and
centrifuged at 14,000 rpm, for 30 min, at 4degC.
In vitro assays for osteoclast formation and activity
Freshly isolated femur BM cells from BALB/c mice (6-8 weeks old) were cultured at
a density of 1x105 cells per well, in 24-well plates, in DMEM plus
10% FBS, containing supernatants from sAg stimulated iliac BM cells in the
presence of M-CSF (10ng/mL), with or without recombinant OPG (10ng/mL)
(Peprotech) or rat anti-mouse IL-17F mAb (10ng/mL) (R&D systems), for 7
days, at 37degC. Positive controls received recombinant RANKL (10ng/mL)
(Peprotech). TRAP staining (Sigma) and pit formation assays (osteologic disks
from BD Biosciences) were carried according to the manufacturer's protocol.
TRAP-positive cells containing three or more nuclei were counted as OCs.
Analysis of serum cytokine and production by LN, spleen or BM derived T
cells
Single cell suspensions from bones were obtained after collagenase Type I (1
mg/mL) and DNase (100 ug/mL) treatment at 37degC, for 60 min. After
mechanical disruption, draining LNs, spleens, and the indicated bones were
cultured (107 cells/ml) with 50ug/mL of sAg, in 24-well plates for 72
hs. Cytokine content was measured by ELISA (R&D Systems). Flow cytometry was
performed 3 days after sAgstimulation. PMA (20 ng/mL, Calbiochem) and ionomycin
(0.2 ug/mL, Sigma-Aldrich) were added to the last 4 hs and, brefeldin A
(Sigma-Aldrich) for the last 2 hs of culture. Anti-mouse CD16/32 mAb (clone
2.4G2) was used for Fc blockage. PE-Cy5-conjugated rat anti-mouse CD3 mAb (clone
145-2C11), APC-conjugated rat anti-mouse CD4 mAb (clone GK 1.5), FITC-conjugated
rat anti-mouse IL-17F mAb (clone 316016), PE-conjugated rat anti-mouse RANKL mAb
(88227), or isotype controls (BD Biosciences) were used and data collected on a
FACSCalibur(r) (BD Biosciences) and analyzed using FlowJo(r) software (Tree
Star).
Bone Histomorphometry and Micro-Computed Tomography
 Iliac bones from BALB/c or nude mice transferred with T cells were fixed in 10%
formalin, decalcified in 20% of EDTA for two weeks, and embedded in paraffin.
5um serial sections were stained with H&E or TRAP according to standard
techniques. Slides were scanned using scanscope
(Aperio(r)).
Bone histomorphometry was performed using a semiautomatic image analysis program
(Motic(r)). TRAP-positive stained OCs were assessed in the same tissue sections
and expressed as number of OCs/mm of bone length. Iliac bones were also fixed in
70% ethanol and high resolution microtomography nondestructive three-dimensional
evaluation of bone volume. Bones were scanned in Skyscan(r) 1076 MicroCT (Skyscan,
Kontich, Belgium) at 70 kV, 141 uA, Al 0.5 mm filter and 12.56 pixel size.
Reconstruction was performed using Nrecon software (Skyscan, Kontich, Belgium),
using for smoothing, beam-hardening and ring-artifact, correction respectively
1, 30 and 10 levels. Grey scale range was set from 0.0000 to 0.0411 HU. The
reconstructed MicroCT files were used to analyze the samples and to create
volume renderings of the region of interest. Bone volume and mineral density was
performed using CTAnalyser software (Skyscan, Kontich, Belgium).
Adoptive transfers
Briefly, 11 days after tumor inoculation, bone marrow cells were obtained as
described above. T cells were positively selected using magnetic beads covered
with anti-mouse CD3 (Miltenyi Biotec). CD3+ purified T cells (more
than 90% pure) were adoptively transferred (1x106 cells/mouse), i.v.,
into naive female BALB/c nude mice (6 mice/group) along with single dose of sAg
(25 ug/mouse). In another experimental set, total LN cells from naive or
tumor-bearing BALB/c mice were used, and 67NR tumor cell were injected into the
mammary fat-pad as the Ag source. Two weeks later, splenocytes were stimulated
in vitro with sAg (50ug/mL) or rat anti-mouse CD3 (1ug/mL).
Non-stimulated cells from all groups were used as controls. Cells were analyzed
by flow cytometry and supernatants were evaluated by ELISA, as previously
described.
RANKL and IL-17F knock-down in T cells of 4T1-tumor bearing mice and mRNA
evaluation of CD3+ cells.
In order to knock-down RANKL and IL-17F in LN T cells of 4T1 tumor-bearing mice,
cells were transfected with specific murine shRNA (RANKL shRNA Plasmid (m):
sc-37270-SH and IL-17F shRNA Plasmid (m): sc-146204-SH, SantaCruz
Biotechnologies) using AMAXA transfection kit for primary murine T cells
(VPA-1006, Amaxa(r) Mouse T Cell Nucleofector(r) Kit, Lonza). Final concentrations
of plasmids were 3 ug, or 6 ug for double transfection. 3 hs after transfection,
viable T cells (50-60%) were adoptively transferred into BALB/c nude mice along
with sAg (25 ug/mouse). The presence of injected cells in spleens and BMs of
nude mice was examined in the end of experiments (day 6 after transfer) by
RT-PCR using mouse specific primers to CD3 and GAPDH for normalization.
Statistical analyses
Data values are expressed as the mean+-SD, from at least three independent
experiments. Statistical differences between mean values were evaluated by
ANOVA, and pairwise comparisons were done by the Tukey test. p
values of <= 0.05 or <= 0.001 were considered to be statistically significant
(minimum n=3). Arabic letters indicate significant differences amongst
groups.

Results
Animals bearing breast metastatic tumors produce high levels of
pro-osteoclastogenic cytokines
In order to examine whether there was a relationship between tumor invasiveness
and a specific pattern of immune response, we used as a model two sibling cell
lines, derived from a spontaneous mammary gland tumor from a BALB/c mouse [35]. The 67NR cell line presents a local
and self-contained growth, while its sibling 4T1 shows an invasive behavior with
development of metastases to the LN, bones and lungs among other tissues. Female
BALB/c mice were implanted in the fourth mammary fat pad either with 4T1 or 67NR
cell lines, and 35 d after tumor injection, we compared the cytokine levels in
the serum and in the supernatants of anti-CD3 stimulated LN cells from mice of
both groups (Figure 1, A and
B). Significantly higher levels of the pro-osteoclastogenic cytokines IL-17F,
RANKL, IL-1b, TNFa, and IL-6 were detected in the sera and supernatants from
LN-stimulated cells of animals bearing the metastatic tumors than in mice with
non-metastatic tumors. Conversely, the levels of anti-osteoclastogenic cytokines
such as IFN-g [25,36] and IL-10 [37]
were higher in the group of mice implanted with non-metastatic tumors. Moreover,
the ratio between OPG (a decoy receptor for RANKL) and RANKL was 10 to 20 fold
lower in the serum of animals bearing metastatic tumors than in mice with
non-metastatic tumors. The low OPG/RANKL ratio happened at the expenses of both
a decreased OPG and an increased RANKL level, surely indicating a
pro-osteoclastogenic activity (Figure 1C). These results show that a prominent pro-osteoclastogenic
cytokine profile is present in animals bearing 4T1 metastatic, but not 67NR
non-metastatic tumors.
10.1371/journal.pone.0068171.g001
Figure 1
Metastatic 4T1 tumor stimulates the production of
pro-osteoclastogenic cytokines.
(A-B) BALB/c female mice were orthotopically
injected in the mammary fat pad with 104 metastatic 4T1 or
non-metastatic 67NR tumor cells. Cytokine production was evaluated by
ELISA in the sera (A) and supernatants of aCD3-stimulated
cells (B) collected from inguinal draining LNs 35 days post
tumor injection. Naive animals were used as negative controls. Data are
expressed as the mean +- SD of five mice/group and are representative of
at least three independent experiments. *p<0.05; **p<0.001.
(C) Serum concentration of OPG and RANKL, and the
OPG/RANKL ratio in tumor-bearing BALB/c mice, measured by ELISA, 35 days
after injection of 4T1 or 67NR tumor cells. a*p<=0.05.
Data are expressed as the mean +- SD of five mice/group.
Bone marrow pro-osteoclastogenic cytokine production in response to
tumor-antigen stimulation precedes metastatic colonization of the bone
marrow
To understand if the production of pro-osteoclastogenic cytokines observed at 35
d after tumor implantation is cause or consequence of metastases to the bone, we
looked at the kinetics of the colonization of the bone cavity by tumor cells as
well as the kinetics of production of pro-osteoclastogenic cytokines in the
marrow microenvironment. Using a clonogenic metastatic assay as well as
molecular analyses, we observed that no metastatic clones are present in the
draining LNs of the tumor until day 14 p.i., and until day 16 p.i. in the BM
(Figure 2A).
10.1371/journal.pone.0068171.g002
Figure 2
Pro-osteoclastogenic cytokine production by BM cells in response to
tumor antigenic stimulation precedes metastatic colonization of the
bones.
(A) Clonogenic metastatic assays were performed with cells
obtained from the draining LNs and iliac BM of BALB/c mice
orthotopically injected with 104 4T1 tumor cells. The number
of metastatic clones was determined at different time points, using a
6-thioguanine resistant assay (left panel). Expression of cytokeratin 19
(CK19) was also determined in such samples by RT-PCR (right panel). 67NR
or 4T1 tumor derived microvesicles (MV) were used as a control to
ascertain that a positive RT-PCR indicates exclusively the presence of
whole tumor cells in the target organ. 4T1 cells mRNA was obtained from
in vitro cultures or in vivo
tumors (+) and was used as a positive control in the RT-PCR assay.
(B) Kinetics of pro-osteoclastogenic cytokine
production in response to tumor soluble antigen (sAg) stimulation of BM
cells obtained from iliac bones of mice bearing 4T1 or 67NR tumors.
Naive animals were used as controls. Supernatants of sAg stimulated
iliac BM cells were harvested after 72hs and cytokine production was
measured by ELISA. Data are expressed as the mean +- SD of five
mice/group and are representative of at least three independent
experiments. *p<0.05.
(C) Osteoclastogenesis assays using naive BM cells
cultured in the presence of either recombinant M-CSF and RANKL, or M-CSF
and supernatant of iliac BM cells derived from 4T1 tumor-bearing mice
(11 d after tumor injection). Supernatant from iliac BM cells of naive
animals (BM Nv) stimulated or not with sAg was used as specific control.
Cultures were also treated with r-OPG or a-IL17F as indicated. The
number of TRAP+ multinucleated OC cells obtained in
vitro was determined (left panel) and TRAP activity in such
supernatants was measured by a colorimetric assay (middle panel). In the
right panel, generation of functional OC cells in vitro was also
determined using BD BioCoatTM OsteologicTM Bone Cell Culture System (BD
Biosciences). The graphic represents the resorbed area on osteologic
discs. All data are from at least two independent experiments (n=5
mice/group) and presented as mean +- SD.
*p<0.05; **p<0.001.
We then looked at the profile of cytokine production in the marrow
microenvironment. To do that, BM cells from animals bearing 4T1 or 67NR tumors
were collected from day 11 to d 35 p.i., the cells were stimulated with tumor
soluble antigen (sAg) in vitro and level of different cytokines was measured by
ELISA (Figure 2B). We found
that bone marrow cells from metastatic 4T1 bearing mice secreted higher
concentrations of pro-osteoclastogenic cytokines than cells from 67NR bearing
animals, even at early time points. Of note is the fact that BM cells from naive
animals do not produce any detectable cytokines after sAg stimulation. This
pattern was observed in all bones tested (Figure
S1A), although it was more prominently seen in the iliac bone, which is
rich in trabecular bone and also a major site of metastasis (Figure
S1B). Surprisingly, we observed no differences in the expression of
IL-17A - a T cell-derived cytokine that is involved in the pathogenesis of
osteolytic lesions in rheumatoid arthritis [30,31] - between BM cells
from mice bearing metastatic or non-metastatic tumors (Figure 2B). Increased levels of IL-17F were
observed in response to tumor antigens nonetheless.
To ascertain that the T cell pro-osteoclastogenic phenotype observed in the BM
could lead to generation of functional OCs, we generated supernatants from
tumor-stimulated BM cells, and tested the ability of these supernatants to
induce osteoclastogenesis in BM cell cultures in vitro, in the presence of
M-CSF, a cytokine required to induce RANK expression in the marrow pre-OCs.
Supernatants from T cells stimulated with 4T1 antigens induced functional OCs
differentiation (Figure 2C,
left panel). This was confirmed when TRAP activity was measured (Figure 2C, middle panels).
These differentiated cells were competent as they consumed mineral matrix
present in osteologic disks in vitro (Figure 2C, right panel). These functional
activities were inhibited by OPG, a decoy receptor for RANKL, but not by
anti-IL-17F, suggesting that T cell derived RANKL is the major osteoclastogenic
molecule in this setting.
Bone loss precedes metastatic colonization of the bone cavity
To understand the impact of pro-osteoclastogenic cytokines production in the bone
dynamics, we looked at its effect on osteoclastogenesis and bone mass in vivo.
We evaluated osteoclastogenesis by counting the number of multinucleated
TRAP+ cells per millimeter (mm) of bone surface in the different
conditions. We found a large increase in the number of OCs in mice implanted
with metastatic 4T1 cells as compared to naive mice or animals bearing 67NR
non-metastatic tumor cell (Figure
3A). This increase already is evident on day 11 post tumor implant,
when bone metastasis is still absent. More important, not only an increased
osteoclastogenesis was observed but also a rapid and early bone loss in 4T1
tumor bearing mice was evident by histomorphometry and uCT (Figure 3, B-D). Indeed, by day 6 p.i., almost
50% of trabecular bone had been resorbed. The above results show that
significant bone loss precedes bone metastatic colonization in animals bearing
4T1 tumor cells.
10.1371/journal.pone.0068171.g003
Figure 3
Increased number of osteoclasts in 4T1 tumor-bearing mice relates to
early bone loss.
(A) Number of TRAP+ multinucleated OC cells was
determined in iliac bones, 11 days after 4T1 or 67NR tumor cells
injection in mammary fat pad. Representative TRAP-stained sections are
shown (original magnifications 40x). (B) Histomorphometric
analysis of iliac bones from naive and 4T1 tumor-bearing mice, at
different time points after tumor injection in the mammary fat pad.
Sagital sections from demineralized iliac bones were made following
conventional methods and stained with H and E. All microscopic slides
were scanned with a ScanScope GL equipped with a 40x objective.
Trabecular bone volume was expressed as a percentage of total tissue
volume. (C-D) High resolution uCT analysis.
BV/TV%, trabecular bone volume/tissue volume were calculated from uCT
images. Results are expressed as mean +- SD and are representative of at
least three independent experiments with 5 mice/group.
*p<0.05;
**p<0.001.
T cells are required for development of pre-metastatic osteolytic
disease
Since metastases to the bone cavity were not found before day 16 after tumor
injection and therefore cannot be responsible for the early bone loss observed,
we asked whether that was actually the result of T cell pro-osteoclastogenic
activity.
First we looked at T cell numbers in the draining LN and bone marrow, starting at
day 11 after tumor inoculation. Although, by day 11, the relative numbers of
CD3+, CD4+ and CD8+ were the same in animals bearing 4T1 or 67NR tumor cells,
the absolute numbers of CD4+, but not CD8+ T cells in the BM of 4T1 positive
mice were already higher than in the other groups (Figures S2A
and S2B).
Since these tumors are derived from BALB/c mice and MMTV positive, we checked
whether this early increase in CD4 T cell numbers in the BM could be the result
of superantigen stimulation. No TCRVb skew was observed in the BM or LN of 4T1
bearing mice when compared to naive animals (Figure S2C)
indicating that no detectable superantigen stimulation is taking place.
To test if T cells were indeed responsible for the early bone loss observed,
CD3+ T cells were purified from the BM of 4T1 or 67NR bearing
BALB/c donor mice 11 days after tumor inoculation (one week before detection of
bone cavity metastases - Figure
2A) and i.v. transferred to T cell-deficient BALB/c Nude (nude)
recipients along with 4T1 sAg. After 14 days, splenocytes from recipient mice of
the different groups were restimulated in vitro with sAg for 72h. Supernatants
obtained from the cultures were harvested and RANKL and IL-17F levels were
measured by ELISA. Production of IL-17F and RANKL was observed only in
supernatant obtained from cells derived from donor mice bearing 4T1, but not
67NR, tumors (Figure 4A). In
line with these results, flow cytometric analyses showed the presence of IL-17F
+ RANKL+ CD4 T cells in the spleen of nude mice that
received cells from 4T1-bearing donors (Figure 4B); On the other hand, IL-17F
+ RANKL+ double positive cells were absent in the CD8+
population (Figure S4B). Also, analysis of the serum showed a low OPG/RANKL
ratio (Figure 4C).
Altogether, these results indicate that the T cell cytokine profile observed in
the bone marrow of 4T1 and 67NR bearing mice is preserved after transfer of BM T
cells to nude mice and is not dependent on the presence of live
tumor cells.
10.1371/journal.pone.0068171.g004
Figure 4
Early bone loss in 4T1 tumor-bearing mice is T cell mediated and
independent of metastatic colonization.
CD3+ T cells derived from iliac BM of BALB/c mice, 11 days
after 4T1 (T 4T1) or 67NR(T 67NR) tumor cells injection into the mammary
fat pad, or control T cells from naive mice (T Nv) were transferred
intravenously to athymic nude mice and challenged with the soluble
fraction of tumor antigen lysate (sAg). (A) 14 days after
transference, spleen cells were restimulated with sAg and IL-17F and
RANKL production was evaluated by ELISA. Data are expressed as the mean
+- SD of five mice/group and are representative of two independent
experiments *p<=0.05.
(B) Frequency of IL-17F+ RANKL+ T
cells was assessed by flow cytometry, 14 days after T cells
transference. Plots show data from CD3+ CD4+ gated
T cells. (C) Serum concentrations of OPG and RANKL and the
OPG/RANKL ratio, measured by ELISA, 14 days after T cells transference.
Data are expressed as the mean +- SD of five mice/group. a, b, c
,d** p<0.001. (D) Histomorphometric
analysis of the iliac bones from mice of the different groups and
(E) high resolution uCT analysis of the iliac bones.
Both analyses were performed as described in Figure 3. Results shown are
representative of at least two independent experiments with 5
mice/group. a, b, c ,d* p<0.05.
Importantly, bone histomorphometry and uCT analyses showed that T cells derived
from 4T1-bearing donors were capable of inducing bone loss in the presence of
tumor antigens but in the absence of tumor cells (Figure 4, D and E). Of note is the fact that
very early after T cell transfer, by day 6, bone loss was already evident no
matter what microCT parameters were analysed (Figure S3).
Similar results were obtained when pre-metastatic LN T cells were transferred
into nude mice (Figure S4). In this case, the source of
antigen was the 67NR cell line indicating that both, 4T1 e 67NR share the
specific epitopes recognized by T cells.
T cell-induced pro-osteoclastogenic activity is dependent on RANKL expression
by T cells
To understand the mechanisms involved in the pre-metastatic bone loss mediated by
T cells we studied how the inhibition of IL17-F and RANKL expression in T cells
would affect osteoclastogenesis. T cells were collected from LNs of 4T1 tumor
bearing mice and IL17F or RANKL expression was suppressed using specific shRNA
(Figure 5A). Silenced T
cells were stimulated in vitro, their supernatants were harvested and tested for
pro-osteoclastogenic potential using an in vitro assay. Silencing RANKL, but not
IL-17F, indeed impairs osteoclastogenesis, indicating that T-cell derived RANKL
plays a major role in the process (Figure 5B). Silenced T cells were also transferred to nude
recipients along with tumor antigen. After 6 days post i.v. transfer, the
phenotype of the transferred T cells still was maintained as shown by an in
vitro osteoclastogenic assay using supernatant derived from in vitro stimulated
spleen cells (Figure 5, C and
D). Again, osteoclastogenesis was observed only in the presence of
RANKL confirming our previous results.
10.1371/journal.pone.0068171.g005
Figure 5
Specific blockage of RANKL expression, but not IL17F, in T cells
abolishes the in
vitro pro-osteoclastogenic activity of tumor-specific T
cells.
LN cells obtained from 4T1 tumor-bearing BALB/c mice (T 4T1), 11 days
after tumor injection, were transfected with shRNA for IL17F (shIL17-F),
RANKL (shRANKL), scramble (scr), or both RANKL and IL17F (Db sh). These
cells were transferred intravenously to athymic nude mice and the
recipients were challenged with soluble tumor antigen (sAg).
(A) Knocked down cells were re-stimulated in
vitro with sAg, and assayed for RANKL and IL17 expression
by ELISA or RT-PCR, prior to injection into recipient mice.
**p<0.001. (B) The
osteoclatogenic activity of supernatants obtained from knocked down
cells, stimulated in vitro with sAg for 3 days, was
also evaluated in osteoclastogenic assays (as described in Figure 2C). The number
of TRAP+ multinucleated OCs was determined per well and the
representative TRAP staining of OCs is shown under each graphic bar.
(C-D) Spleen cells recovered 6 days after
i. v. transfer were restimulated in vitro with sAg and
the osteoclastogenic activity of the supernatants obtained was also
tested over naive BM cells. The number of TRAP+
multinucleated OCs was determined per well and the representative TRAP
staining of OCs is shown in panel D
*p<=0.05.
Pre-metastatic osteolytic disease requires RANKL expression by T
cells
Next, we evaluated if inhibition of RANKL expression in the T cells from 4T1
bearing mice (4T1 T cells) also has an impact in bone loss. RANKL knocked down T
cells were transferred to nude recipients and the number of OCs present in the
endosteal surface was evaluated in vivo. We found that an increase in the number
of OCs was observed in nude mice receiving 4T1 T cells (4T1 T) when compared to
nude recipients that did not receive 4T1 T cells and/or antigen (T Nv, sAg and
No T/sAg groups) (Figure 6A
and Figure
S5A). However, this increase was not observed if the transferred 4T1
T cells were unable to produce RANKL. Moreover, pro-osteoclastogenic activity
does not depend on the production of IL-17F (Figure 6A and Figure
S5A). Bone loss is indeed observed in the absence of IL-17F but is
inhibited by the absence of T cell-derived RANKL (Figure 6B and Figure S5B and
C).
10.1371/journal.pone.0068171.g006
Figure 6
T cell-induced osteoclastogenesis and bone loss requires expression
of RANKL in T cells which "helps" metastatic colonization
(A) LN cells obtained from 4T1 tumor-bearing BALB/c mice (T 4T1), 11 days
after tumor injection, were transfected with shRNA for IL17F (shIL17-F),
RANKL (shRANKL), scramble (scr), or both, RANKL and IL17F (Db sh),
transferred i. v. into athymic nude mice and challenged with soluble
tumor antigen (sAg). Bone sections from recipient mice were prepared and
the number of TRAP+ OCs/mm of bone surface was determined.
(B) High resolution uCT of iliac bones from the different groups of nude
mice transferred with the indicated T cells. Results shown are
representative of two experiments with 5 mice/group).
*p<=0.05;
**p<=0.001. (C-D) Number
of metastatic clones in the LNs and iliac BMs was assessed by clonogenic
metastatic assay in the recipient mice on day 12 and 28. Nude,
non-reconstituted control; T 4T1; reconstitution with 4T1 T cells; sh
scr, sh Scramble T 4T1; sh RANKL, sh RANKLT 4T1. Results shown are
representative of two experiments with 6 mice/group).
**p<=0.001.
T cell-induced pre-metastatic osteolytic bone disease is required for
metastatic colonization of the bone cavity
Our results show that T cell-derived RANKL is necessary for the induction of a
pre-metastatic osteolytic disease. If osteolytic disease is a requirement for
tumor establishment or bone metastasis initiation, as predicted from the vicious
cycle hypothesis [15], we should be able
to interfere with the bone metastatic process by inhibiting RANKL production by
T cells. To test this hypothesis, RANKL expression was knocked down in 4T1T
cells, and these cells were transferred to Nude recipients that were also
implanted with 4T1 tumor cells in the mammary fat pad. While the primary tumor
growth was only delayed in mice that did not receive any T cells or mice
receiving RANKL silenced T cells (Figure S6A), the effects of RANKL knock down
in lymph node and bone metastases were striking. In the absence of T
cell-derived RANKL, metastasis to the LN was reduced to 5% of what was observed
in the positive control group (T 4T1), while development of bone metastases was
completely inhibited (Figure 6, C
and D). Accordingly, bone metastases were also absent, or present in
very small number (until day 28), in nude recipients that were not reconstituted
with T cells (Figure 6D).
This is not a consequence of a diminished primary tumor growth since metastasis
to the lungs are increased in the absence of T cell derived RANKL (Figure
S6B).
These results indicate that RANKL+ T cells provide help for bone, but
not to lung metastasis establishment unveiling an unexpected role of T cells in
promoting bone tumor spread.

Discussion
Although immune activity is classically linked to anti-tumor activity several reports
were published in the past linking immunity to tumor progression [38-40].
We show here that indeed this can be the case. Using a mouse model of breast cancer,
we show that RANKL production by tumor-primed CD4+ T cells is required
for development of bone metastasis. We reached this conclusion by first showing that
the metastatic 4T1 tumor, but not its non-metastatic 67NR sibling, induces
production of pro-osteoclastogenic cytokines, including IL-17F and RANKL by
CD4+ T cells. Production of such cytokines leading to OC formation
and activation, and osteolytic disease, is observed even before tumor cells colonize
the bone cavity, suggesting that CD4+ T cells prepare the metastatic
niche for further establishment of tumor cells in the model used. Inhibition of
RANKL production by tumor-primed CD4+ T cells protects mice from
osteolytic disease and, surprisingly, completely abolishes the development of bone
metastases. Our data is in agreement with two recent studies in the transgenic
MMTV-PyMT mice, a Th2 breast cancer model [14] that does not colonize the bones. In this model, metastasis to the bones
are absent whereas metastasis to the lungs where shown to be Th2 dependent. However,
bone metastasis did occur after a shift in the Th response from Th2 to Th17 [41,42]
corroborating the need of a specific immune phenotype to allow bone
colonization.
10.1371/journal.pone.0068171.g007
Figure 7
RANKL+ tumor-specific T cells prepare the bone pre-metastatic
niche.
After being stimulated (1) and modulated (2) by tumor cells T cells migrate
to the bone marrow (3). When inside the bone marrow niche, T cell derived
RANKL stimulate osteoclastogenesis (4) with bone consumption before tumor
bone colonization (5). This initial bone loss induced by T cells in response
to tumor antigen, prepares the bone marrow niche to receive tumor cells (6).
Once inside the marrow, tumor cells will be able to establish themselves
comfortable (7), at the expense of the pre-metastatic niche already set by T
cell derived RANKL in response to tumor stimulation.
Modulation of the T cell functional phenotype to Th17 can be reached by 4T1 tumor
cells but not 67NR, although either boosting with 4T1 soluble antigen extract or
67NR tumor cells has the same effect on bone loss. This suggests that the tumor
antigens recognized by T cells are shared by both tumors and that the difference in
the quality of the T cell response to these two sibling cell lines is probably due
to differential modulation of the immune response by the tumor cells rather than
being dependent on recognition of different epitopes.
The very early and intense T cell-dependent bone loss observed, in immunocompetent
mice bearing 4T1 tumor or Nudes transferred with 4T1 specific T cells, is indeed
surprising. The number of T cells in the BM is low, comprising 2% or less of the
total marrow cell content. Also, no skew in the distribution of TCR V families was
observed in the presence of 4T1 tumor arguing against any kind of superantigen
stimulation by the tumor to explain the amplitude of the osteolytic bone response.
These results suggest the existence of an amplifying loop triggered by the RANKL+T
cell.
Contribution of T cell-derived RANKL to bone metabolism was first proposed by
Penninger and colleagues in a model of inflammatory bone disease [24]. Later studies showing reversal of RANKL
dependent osteopetrosis by hiperexpression of RANKL in T and B cells [43] reinforced the interplay between T cell
derived RANKL and bone homeostasis. On the other hand, T cell derived IL-17A has
been claimed to be pivotal to osteoclastogenesis by upregulating RANKL expression in
synoviocyte and macrophages in the inflamed joint [25,30]. No direct role for IL-17
in bone physiology or cancer induced bone disease has been reported. In the 4T1
mestastatic model, IL-17F, which shows 50% homology with IL-17A and shares its
receptor [44], is produced in high level but
is not necessary for the development of pre-metastatic bone disease.
In a transgenic model of breast tumor with metastasis to the lungs [45], regulatory T cell-derived RANKL has been
shown to be pro-metastatic. A similar role for Tregs in our model is unlikely
though. First, the number of CD4+CD25+Foxp3+ Treg
cells in mice bearing metastatic and non-metastatic tumors is the same (our
unpublished results). Second, the T cell cytokine profile observed in the presence
of metastatic tumor is not compatible with Treg activity. Finally, Tregs have been
shown to inhibit osteoclastogenesis in other model systems [37] and in periodontal disease, Treg infiltrate is present in
gingivitis preceding periodontitis. When periodontitis is established and actual
bone loss takes place, Tregs disappear from the site of the lesion, giving place to
RANKL+ and IL-17+ T cells [44]. Altogether, these reports indicate that Tregs are not involved in
cancer-induced bone disease, although they can play a role in facilitating
metastasis to organs others than the bones.
Strikingly, T cell derived RANKL expression blockage inhibits the development of bone
metastasis. One could argue that the effect of RANKL inhibition in bone metastasis
is secondary to the effect observed in growth of the primary tumor. Indeed, direct
effect of RANKL in mammary gland cells [26]
has been shown as well as in tumor aggressiveness [46,47]. However, if that was the
case, meaning that delayed tumor growth would be responsible for inhibition or delay
of metastasis development, the prediction would be that metastasis to organs other
than the bones would be also inhibited. Yet, the number of metastatic colonies in
the lungs is four times higher in the absence of RANKL + T cells
indicating that the overall capacity of 4T1 tumor to produce metastasis is not
impaired in the absence of T cell-derived RANKL. On the contrary, the use of
osteoclast inhibitors such as anti-RANKL can certainly protect the bones but might
increase the risk of pulmonary metastasis when acting over T cells, a point that
needs further investigation.
We believe that the characterization of T cell-induced pre-metastatic osteolytic
disease adds an extra step to the vicious cycle hypothesis (Figure 7). Tumor cells are believed to establish
themselves in the BM through mechanisms that culminate in the release of growth
factors from the bone matrix as a consequence of osteoclast activity. Here, we
suggest that in the presence of metastatic tumors, antigen-specific T cells are
primed and acquire a pro-osteoclastogenenic phenotype. Following their migratory
pattern, tumor-specific primed T cells expressing RANKL migrate to the bone cavity,
before tumor cells colonize it, and once there they stimulate the differentiation
and activation of OCs. Pre-metastatic T cell mediated bone consumption generates a
rich environment that will allow the colonization of the bone cavity by the
metastatic clones. Once initial seeding of the bone tissue is achieved, the tumor
cells can continue the osteolytic process on their own, feeding themselves through
the vicious cycle established with the bone microenvironment.
Altogether, our results unveil an uncommon perspective of tissue-specific immune
activation leading to progression of cancer and identify T cells as a major player
in pre-metastatic osteolytic disease and development of bone metastasis.

Supporting Information
Figure S1
Anti-tumor specific cytokine profile in BM cells differs between
metastatic 4T1 and non-metastatic 67NR-bearing mice.
BALB/c female mice were subcutaneously injected with 104 67NR or
4T1 tumor cells into the mammary fat pad. (a) Functional profile of BM tumor
specific T cells among different bone marrows. 106 cells from
draining LNs (inguinal) and BMs, from different bones (calvariae, iliac,
humerus, femur and tibiae) were stimulated in the presence or in the absence
of 4T1 soluble tumor-Ag (sAg) as the antigen source. Culture supernatants
were collected after 72 hs and cytokine levels were quantified by ELISA. All
data are presented as the level of cytokine measured per number of
CD3+ T cells. (b) At the indicated time points, LNs and
different bones were harvested and the number of metastatic clones was
determined by the 6-thioguanine resistant metastatic clonogenic assay. All
data are from at least three independent experiments (n=5/mice per group)
and presented as mean +- SD.
(PDF)
Click here for additional data file.
Figure S2
Absence of TCR Vb skew in response to tumor cells.
BALB/c mice were orthotopically injected in mammary fat pad (sc.) with
104 metastatic 4T1 or non-metastatic 67NR tumor cells. (a) At
the indicated time points, the frequency (%) of CD3+, CD3+ CD4+ and CD3+
CD8+ T cells in LNs and iliac BMs were assessed by flow cytometry, after
tumor cells injection. LN and iliac BM cells from naive animals were used as
experimental controls. (b) The absolute number of CD3+, CD3+ CD4+ and CD3+
CD8+ T cells in LNs and iliac BMs were also calculated. Data are expressed
as the mean +- SD of five mice/group and are representative of at least two
independent experiments. *p<=0.05;
**p<=0.001. (c) TCR Vb family distribution in the CD3+ CD4+ T
cell population recovered from the draining lymph nodes or bone marrow of
4T1 recipient mice or naive controls, 14 d p.i.
(PDF)
Click here for additional data file.
Figure S3
Pro-osteoclastogenic 4T1 tumor-specific T cells induce bone loss
in vivo in the absence of tumor cells 6 days after
adoptive transfer.
4T1 LN T cells were isolated from BALB/c female mice, 11 d after 4T1 tumor
cells injection into the mammary fat pad. LN cells were intravenously
transferred to BALB/c nude female mice along with 4T1 sAg. High resolution
uCT analysis of iliac bones from nude mice, at different time points after
transference of 4T1 LN T cells. The parameters calculated from uCT images
were BV/TV%, trabecular bone volume/tissue volume were; total bone mineral
density (g/cm2); trabecular number (1/mm) and trabecular
thickness (mm). Values are mean +- SD of 3 mice. *p <=
0.05.
(PDF)
Click here for additional data file.
Figure S4
Pro-osteoclastogenic 4T1 tumor-specific T cells keep their phenotype
in vivo after adoptive transfer.
T cells were isolated from draining lymph node of BALB/c female mice, 11 d
after 67NR or 4T1 tumor cells injection into mammary gland. LN cells were
intravenously transferred to BALB/c nude female mice. On the same day, the
animals received 67NR non-metastatic tumor cells subcutaneously as the
source of Ag. T cells from naive mice were used as controls. 14 d after
transference, spleen cells were stimulated with sAg and IL-17 F and RANKL
expression were either evaluated by ELISA (a) or (b) FACS.
IL-17F+ RANKL+ T cells were gated on
CD3+CD4+ and CD3+CD8+. (c)
Sera OPG/RANKL ratio, measured by ELISA, of BALB/c mice 14 d after
transference. *p<0.05,
**p<0.001.
(d) Bone histomorphometrical analysis of iliacs from the different
experimental and control groups. Trabecular bone volume was expressed as a
percentage of total tissue volume. All data are from two independent
experiments (n=3/mice per group) and presented as mean +- SD.
*p<=0.05.
(PDF)
Click here for additional data file.
Figure S5
osteolytic disease induced by T cell derived RANKL.
(A) Representative micrography of the TRAP staining in the bone sections
obtained in each experimental group is shown. Arrows indicate osteoclasts:
4T1 T cells (T 4T1), Naive T cells (T Nv), no T cells (No T) or no T cell
nor sAg (no T/sAg). *p<=0.05. (B) High resolution
uCT and (C) Histomorphometric analysis of iliac bones from the different
groups of nude mice transferred with the indicated T cells. Results shown
are representative of two experiments with 5 mice/group).
*p<=0.05;
**p<=0.001.
(PDF)
Click here for additional data file.
Figure S6
Effect of T cell derived RANKL in primary tumor growth and lung
meetastasisi.
(A) Maximum diameter of primary tumors was determined by ultrasonography on
days 12 and 26. (B) Number of metastatic clones in the lungs was assessed by
clonogenic metastatic assay in the recipient mice on day 12 and 28. Nude,
non-reconstituted control; T 4T1; reconstitution with 4T1 T cells; sh scr,
sh Scramble T 4T1; sh RANKL, sh RANKLT 4T1. Results shown are representative
of two experiments with 6 mice/group).
**p<=0.001.
(PDF)
Click here for additional data file.
