[Abstract, Introduction, Results, Discussion, Methods]

p16INK4A Represses the paracrine tumor-promoting effects of breast stromal
fibroblasts. Cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs), the most abundant and probably the most active cellular component of breast cancer-associated stroma, promote carcinogenesis through paracrine effects; however, the molecular basis remains elusive. We have shown here that p16INK4A expression is reduced in 83% CAFs as compared with their normal adjacent counterparts cancer-free tissues isolated from the same patients. This decrease is mainly due to AUF1-dependent higher turnover of the CDKN2A mRNA in CAFs. Importantly, p16INK4A downregulation using specific siRNA activated breast fibroblasts and increased the expression/secretion levels of stromal cell-derived factor 1 (SDF-1) and matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-2. Consequently, media conditioned with these cells stimulated the proliferation of epithelial cells. Furthermore, the migration/invasion of breast cancer cells was also enhanced in an SDF-1-dependent manner. This effect was mediated through inducing an epithelial-mesenchymal transition state. By contrast, increase in p16INK4A level through ectopic expression or AUF1 downregulation, reduced the secreted levels of SDF-1 and MMP-2 and suppressed the pro-carcinogenic effects of CAFs. In addition, p16INK4A-defective fibroblasts accelerated breast tumor xenograft formation and growth rate in mice. Importantly, tumors formed in the presence of p16INK4A-defective fibroblasts exhibited higher levels of active Akt, Cox-2, MMP-2 and MMP-9, showing their greater aggressiveness as compared with xenografts formed in the presence of p16INK4A-proficient fibroblasts. These results provide the first indication that p16INK4A downregulation in breast stromal fibroblasts is an important step toward their activation.

Introduction
Breast cancer is a major health problem that threatens the lives of millions of women
worldwide each year.1 Large amount of data
indicate that cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs), which constitute the major component
of the tumor stroma, actively participate in tumor cells proliferation and
spread.2, 3
Indeed, it has been shown that human breast cells produced significantly faster growing
tumors when mixed with CAFs than when mixed with normal fibroblasts.4, 5, 6 Furthermore, co-injection of lethally irradiated fibroblasts or
inclusion of fibroblast-conditioned medium (CM) with breast cancer cell grafts increased
carcinogenesis and tumor growth, indicating that activated fibroblasts promote tumor
growth by secreting soluble factors.7, 8 Indeed, Orimo et al.9 have clearly shown that stromal fibroblasts present in invasive
human breast carcinomas promote tumor growth and angiogenesis through elevated stromal
cell-derived factor 1 (SDF1) secretion. Several other chemokines, growth factors and
matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are secreted by stromal fibroblasts and their secretion
increases when these fibroblasts are activated.3,
10 However, the molecular mechanisms that
regulate the secretion of these chemotactic factors are still obscure.
p16INK4A (hereafter referred to as p16) is a cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor
that has multiple biological functions, including the inhibition of cell cycle
progression,11 and the induction of
senescence.12 The tumor suppressor functions
of p16 have been extensively studied in tumor cells, paying only little attention to its
potential cell nonautonomous effects from the surrounding stromal cells, including
fibroblasts.
The presented data clearly show that in addition to its well-known cell autonomous tumor
suppressor functions, p16 has also a major cell nonautonomous tumor inhibitory role.

Results
p16 is downregulated in breast cancer-associated stromal fibroblasts
The p16 expression was first investigated in 12 human breast CAFs and their counterpart
fibroblasts isolated from histologicaly normal cancer-free tissues (TCFs). CAF/TCF
pairs were always used simultaneously at similar passages. Whole-cell extracts were
prepared and specific anti-p16 and anti-GAPDH (used as internal control) antibodies were
utilized for immunoblotting analysis. Figures 1a and b show
that the level of p16 is lower in 10 out of 12 CAFs (83%) as compared with their
corresponding TCFs. However, p16 level was similar in 2 CAF/TCF pairs 114 and 148
(Figures 1a and b). In addition, a great interindividual
variation in p16 expression was observed between the various CAFs and also TCFs (Figures 1a and b).
The level of the CDKN2A mRNA was also assessed in the same cells by reverse
transcription (RT)-PCR. Therefore, total RNA was prepared and specific primers for
CDKN2A as well as b-actin (used as internal control) were utilized for
amplification. Figures 1c and d show a clear decrease in the
CDKN2A mRNA level in 10 out of 12 (83%) CAFs, as compared with their
adjacent TCFs, while CDKN2A mRNA was similar in the two CAF/TCF pairs 114
and 148. These results were confirmed for some CAF/TCF pairs with quantitative
RT-PCR (data not shown). This shows that the expression of the CDKN2A
mRNA reflects that of the corresponding protein in the majority of the TCF/CAF pairs
(Figures 1b and d), indicating that the decrease in p16
protein level is due, at least in part, to a decrease in the level of its corresponding
transcript.
To provide evidence that p16 downregulation in CAFs is also taking place in breast
tissues, frozen sections including both tumor and their adjacent normal tissues were
double immunostained by fluorescent anti-p16 and anti-vimentin (fibroblast cells marker)
antibodies. Figure 1e shows lower positive staining for p16
in fibroblasts present in tumors than in their counterparts present in normal parts.
This indicates that p16 is also downregulated in CAFs in vivo.
The CDKN2A mRNA turnover is faster in CAFs versus TCFs
Next, we sought to study the CDKN2A mRNA half-life in the TCF/CAF-180
pair. To this end, cells were treated with the transcription inhibitor, actinomycin D
(5 mg/ml) for different periods of time. Subsequently, total RNA was
purified and quantified by RT-PCR using specific primers for CDKN2A and
b-actin. Figure 2a shows that the CDKN2A mRNA
is more stable in TCF cells as compared with their corresponding CAFs. Indeed, while the
CDKN2A mRNA half-life is >6 h in TCF-180, it is only 45 min
in CAF-180 (Figure 2a). Similar results were obtained for
other CAF/TCF pairs (data not shown), which strongly suggests that the lower level
of the CDKN2A mRNA in CAFs is due to its faster turnover in these cells as
compared with their adjacent counterparts.
The level of the AUF1 protein is higher in CAFs than in TCFs
To explore the cause of the CDKN2A mRNA instability in CAFs, we assessed the
level of the RNA decay-promoting protein AUF1, which is known to regulate the RNA
stability of the CDKN2A mRNA,13 by
immunoblotting. To this end, cell extracts from the 12 CAF/TCF pairs, and specific
anti-AUF1 as well as anti-GAPDH antibodies were used. Figure
2c shows that the AUF1 protein (46 kDa band) is clearly upregulated in
8 out of 12 CAFs (66%) as compared with their corresponding TCFs. Importantly,
the CDKN2A mRNA was downregulated in all CAFs were AUF1 was found highly
expressed (Figures 1d and 2c).
To further elucidate the link between AUF1 and p16 downregulation in CAFs, we tested
the effect of AUF1 knockdown using specific siRNA on the expression level of the
CDKN2A mRNA in CAF-64. Therefore, these cells were transfected with plasmids
harboring either AUF1-siRNA or control siRNA for 24 h, and then cells were
harvested. Total RNA was purified and the level of the CDKN2A mRNA was assessed
by RT-PCR. Figure 2d shows that the AUF1
level decreased significantly in the AUF1-siRNA-expressing cells as compared
with the control cells. Concomitantly, the CDKN2A mRNA level increased in the
AUF1-siRNA-expressing cells (Figure 2d),
indicating that AUF1 is indeed a negative regulator of CDKN2A in breast stromal
fibroblasts, and it's increase reduced p16 expression in these cells.
p16 Downregulation upregulates the a-SMA, SDF-1 and MMP-2
proteins
In an effort to study the various effects of p16 downregulation, TCF-64 cells were
transfected with a vector expressing either CDKN2A siRNA or a nonspecific
control siRNA as previously described.14
Subsequently, specific antibodies were used for immunoblotting analysis. Figure 3a shows that p16 protein level declined 7.7-fold in the
CDKN2A-siRNA-treated cells (T64-si) as compared with their corresponding
control cells (T64C). However, the level of p14 was not affected, while the expression
of p21 decreased, as expected,15 like in
CAF-64 cells (Figure 3a).
Interestingly, like in the corresponding CAF-64 cells, this decrease in the p16 protein
level was accompanied by strong increase in the levels of a-SMA (10-fold) and
SDF-1 (threefold; Figure 3a), two important markers of
activated stromal fibroblasts.9, 10 Likewise, p16 downregulation increased the expression of MMP-2
(twofold). This suggests a possible role of p16 in repressing breast stromal
fibroblasts.
The effect of the p16 knockdown was also assessed on the MMP-2 and
SDF-1 mRNA levels by real-time RT-PCR. Figure
3b shows that the mRNA levels of the two genes increased by about 50%
in p16-defective cells as compared with their corresponding controls, with
P-values of 5 x 10-5 and 5 x
10-4, respectively. Similar results were obtained when p16 was
downregulated with a specific shRNA targeting different sequence of the gene and used
transiently (data not shown). To further show this, CAF-64 cells were transfected with
adenovirus-based plasmids-expressing CDKN2A (C64-ORF (open reading frame)) or
not (C64C). Total RNA was purified from these cells 3 days post infection and real-time
RT-PCR using specific primers was performed. Figure 3c
upper panel shows the increase in the expression of CDKN2A in cells expressing
the gene. The lower panel shows that the introduction of the CDKN2A ORF in
CAF-64 cells significantly reduced the expression of the MMP-2 and
SDF-1 mRNAs. Therefore, the mRNA levels of these genes are modulated in a
p16-dependent manner.
p16 Suppresses the secretion of SDF-1 and MMP-2 from breast stromal
fibroblasts
CAF-64 and TCF-64 as well as T64-si and T64C cells were cultured in complete media for
24 h, and CM from each culture were collected and the levels of SDF-1 and MMP-2
were assessed by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA)-based assay. Figure 3c shows that the levels of secreted proteins from CAF-64
were higher than their levels secreted from TCF-64. Likewise, the downregulation of p16
also increased the secretion of these proteins (Figure 3c).
Indeed, the levels of SDF-1 and MMP-2 were 2.5-fold higher in T64-si cells than in the
control cells (Figure 3c). These values mirror those of
protein expression obtained by immunobloting and depicted on Figure
3a. Similar results were obtained using CDKN2A-shRNA (data not
shown). Furthermore, CM from CAF-64 cells expressing the CDKN2A gene (C64-ORF)
and their respective control cells (C64C) were collected, and the levels of SDF-1 and
MMP-2 were assessed by ELISA. Figure 3e shows that the
increase in the level of the p16 coding gene reduced the secreted levels of SDF-1 and
MMP-2. This indicates that p16 restrains the secretion of these cancer-promoting
proteins in breast stromal fibroblasts.
p16-Deficient fibroblast secretions stimulate breast cancer cell
invasion/migration in an SDF1-dependent manner
Next, we sought to study the effect of p16 downregulation in fibroblast cells on the
migration/invasion of breast cancer cells. To this end, we used serum-free-CM
(SF-CM) collected from T64-si and T64C after 24 h of culture. In addition, CpM
and SFM were used as controls. Subsequently, 105 MDA-MB-231 cells in
200 ml SF-CM were seeded in the upper compartment of the migration and
invasion plates for 24 h. The migration and invasion of MDA-MB-231 cells were
higher in the presence of CpM than in the presence of SFM (Figure
4a). Interestingly, the migration and invasion of cancer cells were more
significant when these cells were incubated with media from p16-defective cells. Indeed,
the migration and invasion of MDA-MB-231 cells were, respectively, two and threefold
higher in the presence of SF-CM from T64si cells than from the control cells
(P-values=0.0039 and 1.92 x 10-5, respectively;
Figure 4a). Likewise, the invasion and migration of
MDA-MB-231 cells were twofold higher in the presence of SF-CM from TCF-64 cells
expressing CDKN2A-shRNA than in the presence of SF-CM from the control cells
(data not shown). Similarly, SF-CM from p16-/- mouse embryonic
fibroblasts (MEFs) stimulated the migration/invasion of MDA-MB-231 cells more than
SF-CM from p16+/+ MEFs (Figure 4b).
Interestingly, increasing the expression of the CDKN2A gene through ectopic
expression in the CAF-64 cells (C64-ORF) significantly reduced the ability of these
cells (as compared with their control counterparts) in enhancing the
invasion/migration of breast cancer cells (Figure
4c).
In an attempt to investigate the possible role of SDF-1 in this stimulation in both
human and mouse cells, SF-CM from T64-si and p16-/- MEFs were either
challenged either with immunoglobulin G1 antibody or with anti-SDF-1 inhibitory
antibody, and the effect on the migration/invasion of the MDA-MB-231 cells was
studied as described above. Figure 4d confirms the
stimulatory effect of CDKN2A downregulation and also shows that the inhibition
of SDF-1 in SF-CM from both human and mouse fibroblasts reduced the
migration/invasion potential of breast cancer cells to levels similar to those
obtained with SF-CM from the respective cells.
p16-Deficient fibroblast secretions stimulate an epithelial-mesenchymal
transition-like state in breast cancer cells
Next, the level of the active forms of extracellular signal-regulated kinase and Akt
was assessed by immunoblotting in MDA-MB-231 cells treated with SF-CM from TCF-64,
CAF-64 as well as T64-si and T64C. Figure 5a shows that
while the levels of the inactive forms of these proteins did not change, the levels of
the phosphorylated extracellular signal-regulated kinase and Akt increased in MDA-MB-231
cells treated with SF-CM from CAF-64 and T64-si, as compared with their respective
controls. These factors are known to induce the motile and invasive capacities of cancer
cells via promotion of epithelial-mesenchymal transition state.16 To further confirm this transition, we assessed the
levels of N-cadherin, CD90 and vimentin as important markers of mesenchymal
cells.17
Figure 5a shows that the level of the N-cadherin protein
increased in MDA-MB-231 cells treated with SF-CM from T64-si cells as compared with the
control. Using flow cytometry, we have also shown that CD90 and vimentin levels were
markedly higher in breast cancer cells exposed to media conditioned with p16-defective
cells as compared with their respective controls (Figure
5b). Together, these results indicate that p16-defective breast stromal
fibroblasts trigger epithelial-mesenchymal transition state in a paracrine
manner.
p16 Downregulation in stromal fibroblasts stimulates epithelial cell
proliferation through paracrine signaling
CAF-64, TCF-64, T64-si and T64C were cultured in SFM for 24 h, counted and SF-CM
was collected and then added separately to MCF-10 cells in 96-well plates. The real-time
cell electronic sensing system (ACEA Biosciences Inc., San Diego, CA, USA) was used to
monitor the effect of each SF-CM as well as SFM and complete media (used as controls) on
cellular proliferation. Although MCF-10 cells proliferated rapidly in the presence of
CpM, their multiplication was very slow in the presence of SFM (Figure 5c). Furthermore, MCF-10A proliferated faster under the effect of
CAF-64 SF-CM than in the presence of SF-CM from the corresponding cells (TCF-64).
Interestingly, SF-CM from p16-defective T64-si cells enhanced more than twofold the
proliferation rate of MCF-10 cells as compared with their proliferation in the presence
of SF-CM from control cells (Figure 5c). This indicates that
p16 in breast stromal fibroblasts inhibits epithelial cell proliferation through
paracrine secreted factors.
AUF1 downregulation suppresses the effects of p16-deficient stromal
fibroblasts
After showing that AUF1 downregulation upregulates p16 in CAF-64 cells (Figure 2d), we sought to investigate the effect of this
downregulation on the level of secreted SDF-1 and MMP-2. To this end, the levels of
these proteins were assessed by ELISA in CM from CAF-64-expressing AUF1-siRNA
or control-siRNA. Figure 6a shows that AUF1-defective cells
wherein p16 level increased showed a strong decrease in the secreted levels of SDF-1 and
MMP-2.
Next, we sought to study the effect of AUF1 downregulation in CAF-64 cells on the
migration/invasion of breast cancer cells using SF-CM collected from
CAF-64-expressing AUF1-siRNA or control-siRNA. The invasion and the migration
of MDA-MB-231 cells were assessed as described above, and were found to be lower in the
presence of SF-CM from C64-si cells than from C64C cells
(P-values=0.002246 and 0.000608, respectively; Figure
6b). This indicates that AUF1 downregulation reduces the pro-carcinogenic
effects of p16-defective stromal fibroblasts, may be through p16-upregulation.
p16-Deficient fibroblasts stimulate breast cancer xenograft growth in
mice
To investigate the effect of p16 deficiency in fibroblasts on tumor growth and
angiogenesis in vivo, 25 nude mice were randomized into five groups and breast
cancer xenografts were created subcutaneously by coimplantation of MDA-MB-231 cells (2
x 106) with p16-/- or p16+/+ MEFs
(106) into the right leg of each mouse. As controls 5 x
106 and 2 x 106 MDA-MB-231 cells and 106
p16-/- cells were injected separately. MEF cells were used in these
experiments because of their fast growth as compared with the transfected breast stromal
fibroblasts (T64si and the corresponding T64C). Although all mice coinjected with
MDA-MB-231 and p16-/- MEF cells developed tumors, only two out of five
mice coninjected with MDA-MB-231 and p16+/+ MEFs had tumors.
Interestingly, tumors containing p16-deficient fibroblasts (T-MEFp16-/-)
appeared only 1 week post injection and grew faster than those containing p16-proficient
fibroblasts (T-MEFp16+/+), which appeared after 3 weeks (Figure 7a). No tumors were obtained by injecting
p16-/- or MDA-MB-231 (2 x 105) cells alone, while four
out of five mice developed tumors following the injection of MDA-MB-231 (5 x
105) cells alone and appeared only after 4 weeks. However, the histology of
the formed tumors was similar in both cases (data not shown). These results show that
p16-defective fibroblasts promoted breast cancer tumor formation and enhanced their
growth rate in nude mice as compared with their isogenic normal cells.
To further elucidate the role of p16 in the effect of these fibroblasts on cancer cells
in vivo, whole-cell extracts were prepared from the two tumor xenografts
T-MEFp16+/+ and 2 T-MEFp16-/-, and the levels of various
cancer- and metastasis-promoting genes were assessed by immunoblotting. Figure 7b shows that while the level of Akt is similar in all the
four tumors, the level of the phosphorylated form of the protein was higher in the two
T-MEFp16-/- than in the T-MEFp16+/+ tumors. Then, we
assessed the levels of important downstream targets of the Atk/NF-kB pathway, namely
Cox-2 and cyclin D1. In fact the levels of these two important oncogenes were markedly
higher in the two T-MEFp16-/- than in the T-MEFp16+/+
tumors (Figure 7b). We also assessed the level of MMP-9 and
MMP-2 and have found that these two proteins are also highly expressed in the two tumors
with MEFp16-/- than in the two T-MEFp16+/+ (Figure 7b). As MDA-MB-231 cells do not express p16, this protein
was not detected in both types of tumors T-MEFp16-/- and
T-MEFp16+/+ (data not shown). Furthermore, we assessed the level of p16,
cyclin D1 and MMP-9 in MEFp16-/- and MEFp16+/+ and have
shown that p16 knockdown did not affect the level of MMP-9 and rather decreased the
level of cyclin D1 in pure MEF cells (data not shown), confirming that the observed
effects were rather on breast cancer epithelial cells.

Discussion
In this study, we have shown that the tumor suppressor p16 protein has an important role
in controlling mammary stromal fibroblast autocrine and paracrine signaling. We started
this study by showing that p16 is downregulated in CAFs as compared with their
corresponding TCFs, isolated from the same patients. This p16 decrease suggests a role of
cancer cells in suppressing p16 expression in fibroblast cells present in their vicinity,
either directly or indirectly through sustained proliferative stress. In fact, several
lines of evidence indicate that neoplastic cells have the ability to affect their
microenvironment and modulate gene expression in the surrounding fibroblasts through
secreted factors.18, 19 In addition, p16 expression was also low in some TCF cells as
compared with TCFs from other patients, which could be owing to interindividual variation
in the expression of p16.
The reduction in p16 level did not result from methylation of the p16 promoter (data not
shown), but was due to a decrease in the stability of the CDKN2A mRNA in CAFs,
which resulted from the increase in the expression of the CDKN2A mRNA
destabilizing protein AUF1.20 AUF1 knockdown in
CAF cells increased the expression of the CDKN2A mRNA and also suppressed the
pro-carcinogenic effects of these cells. Intriguingly, AUF1 level was found higher in
TCF-114 than in its counterpart CAF-114, with no much effect on p16 level. This could
suggest alteration in other p16/AUF1-regulatory pathway(s) in these cells.
Interestingly, AUF1 controls also the expression of many other important breast
cancer-related proteins such as Cox-2, cyclin D1, C-Myc, Bcl-2, ERa and many
others.21 This indicates that the increase
in the level of AUF1 in breast stromal fibroblasts could constitute a major change in CAFs
that could explain, in great part, the significant modulation in gene expression that has
been previously reported in such cells.22, 23, 24, 25
In addition, we have shown that p16 negatively regulates the expression of both SDF-1 and
MMP-2 in breast stromal fibroblasts. SDF-1, a promoter of tumor growth and
angiogenesis,9 is also negatively controlled
by p53.26 This indicates that this important
cancer-promoting factor is under the control of two master tumor suppressor proteins p16
and p53. Indeed, inhibition of SDF-1 in CM severely reduced the pro-invasive/migratory
effects of p16-defective human and MEF cells (Figure 4).
Regarding MMP-2, several lines of evidence suggests that p16 negatively regulates this
pro-invasion protein in various cell types. Indeed, p16 expression inhibited the
expression of MMP-2 in lung cancer cells27 and
in glioma.28 The present findings corroborate
these results and provide clear evidence that MMP-2 expression is modulated in a
p16-dependent manner in breast stromal fibroblasts. These results raise an important
question on how p16 regulates the expression/secretion of these factors. In fact,
several lines of evidence indicate that p16 is not a mere CDKI. p16 Overexpression has
also been found in some benign tumors and in some cancer types, such as cervical cancer,
breast cancer and head and neck cancer.29, 30 Therefore, it is possible that p16 is affecting the
expression of these genes through modulating the kinase activity of CDK4 and/or CDK6.
The other possibility is that this p16 function is mediated through interaction with other
proteins. Indeed, it has been shown that p16 interacts with several proteins involved
directly or indirectly in the control of gene expression such as HSP90, EF-2, hnRNP C1 and
others.31 Furthermore, it has been recently
shown that p16 interacts with GRAM-19 to regulate E2F1-responsive gene
expression.32
The enhancement of the migratory ability of breast cancer cells was higher in the
presence of media conditioned with p16-defective human cells than with
p16-/- MEFs as compared with their respective controls (Figure 4). It is possible that the pro-migratory effect of p16 deficiency is
higher in human fibroblasts than in MEFs, owing to higher amounts of secreted cytokines
and growth factors. It is also possible that the secreted human factors are more efficient
than their counterpart mouse factors in enhancing the migration of human breast cancer
cells.
Importantly, we have shown that CM from p16-defective stromal fibroblast cells induced
the three major mesenchymal markers N-cadherin, vimentin and CD90 and also activated Akt
and extracellular signal-regulated kinase, two migration- and invasion-promoting
factors,16 in MDA-MB-231 cells (Figure 5a). It has been previously shown that this
epithelial-mesenchymal transition can be induced by active fibroblasts and enhances
the migratory and invasiveness capacity of breast cancer cells.33 This shows that p16 has a major role in stromal
fibroblast-mediated epithelial-mesenchymal transition state and its consequent
increase in the invasive and metastatic behavior of neoplastic cells.
In addition, p16-deficient fibroblasts enhanced the proliferation of epithelial cells
in vitro and the formation and growth of breast tumor xenografts in mice, which
is another major feature of activated fibroblasts. The tumors formed in the presence of
p16-deficient cells expressed high levels of Cox-2 and MMP-9, known to promote tumor cell
invasion and has been recently shown to be an important mediator of CAF-induced tumor
growth and progression.34 These tumors showed
also high levels of MMP-2, cyclin D1 and active Akt, which explains their faster onset and
growth.
In addition to p16, other important tumor suppressor genes such as p53, p21,
PTEN and CAV-1 are also implicated in repressing the procarcinogenic
effects of breast stromal fibroblasts both in vitro and in
vivo.26, 35,
36, 37, 38, 39
In summary, the present findings have shown that in addition to its well-known
cell-autonomous tumor suppressor function within incipient pro-carcinogenic epithelial
cells, stromal fibroblast p16, like other tumor suppressor genes, exerts also cell
nonautonomous effects on breast tumorigenesis. Therefore, stromal fibroblast p16 might
constitute a valid therapeutic target to stop tumor progression and/or recurrence.

Materials and methods
Cells, cell culture and chemicals
Breast fibroblast cells were obtained, characterized and cultured as previously
described.40 MEF cell lines (a generous
gift from Dr R A DePinho) were cultured as described previously41 and used at low passages (6-8). In the present
experiments, CAFs and their corresponding TCFs were always cultured simultaneously, in
the same conditions and at similar passages (4-8). CAFs grow slightly faster than
their corresponding TCFs and slight variation in cellular growth was also observed
between various CAFs and various TCFs,40 and
both can reach passage 12 with no sign of senescence.
MDA-MB-231 and MCF-10 cell lines were obtained from ATCC (Manassas, VA, USA) and were
cultured following the instructions of the company. All supplements were obtained from
Sigma (St Louis, MO, USA) except for antibiotics and antimycotics solutions, which were
obtained from Gibco (Grand Island, NY, USA).
Immunohistochemical staining
Frozen tissues plated on coverslips were used as detailed in the Supplementary Materials and methods.
Cellular lysate preparation and immunoblotting
This has been performed as described previously.14 See Supplementary Materials and
methods for details.
RNA purification, RT-PCR and real-time RT-PCR
Total RNA was purified using the TRI reagent (Sigma) according to the
manufacturer's instructions, RT-PCR and real-time RT-PCR were
performed as described in the Supplementary Materials and
methods.
Analysis of mRNA stability
Cells were challenged with 5 mg/ml actinomycin D for various periods of
time (0-6 h) and then total RNA was purified and assessed using
RT-PCR.
siRNA transfection
The permanent transfection using CDKN2A-siRNA and control-siRNA was performed
as described previously.14
pSILENCER-AUF1siRNA and control-siRNA plasmids20 were used to carry out transient transfection using the human
dermal fibroblast nucleofector kit (Amaxa Biosystems, Gaithersburg, MD, USA) following
the protocol recommended by the manufacturer. Low passage cells (2-4) were used
for transfection.
Cell proliferation analysis
A volume of 100 ml of complete medium containing 2-4 x
103 cells was loaded in each well of the 96-well microtiter E-plates with
integrated microelectronic sensor ayyars at the bottom of each well, and cell
proliferation was assessed by the real-time cell electronic sensing system as
describedpreviously40 and detailed in the
Supplementary Materials and methods.
Chemotaxis and invasion assay
The 24-well BD BioCoat Matrigel Invasion Chambers were used as per the manufacturer
guideline (BD Bioscience, Chicago, IL, USA). See Supplementary
Materials and methods for a detailed description.
Conditioned media
Cells were cultured in media+-serum for 24 h, and then the media were
collected and centrifuged. The resulting supernatant was either used immediately or
frozen at -80degC until needed.
Tumor xenografts
Animal experiments were approved by the KFSH&RC institutional Animal Care and Use
Committee (ACUC) and were conducted according to relevant national and international
guidelines. See Supplementary Materials and methods for
a detailed description.
Statistical analysis
Statistical analysis was performed by the Student's t-test and
P-values of 0.05 and less were considered as statistically significant.
