[Abstract, Introduction, Methods, Results, Discussion, Discussion, Mixed]

Mammogram image quality as a potential contributor to disparities in breast
cancer stage at diagnosis: an observational study. Background In an ongoing study of racial/ethnic disparities in breast cancer stage at diagnosis, we consented patients to allow us to review their mammogram images, in order to examine the potential role of mammogram image quality on this disparity.   Methods In a population-based study of urban breast cancer patients, a single breast imaging specialist (EC) performed a blinded review of the index mammogram that prompted diagnostic follow-up, as well as recent prior mammograms performed approximately one or two years prior to the index mammogram. Seven indicators of image quality were assessed on a five-point Likert scale, where 4 and 5 represented good and excellent quality. These included 3 technologist-associated image quality (TAIQ) indicators (positioning, compression, sharpness), and 4 machine associated image quality (MAIQ) indicators (contrast, exposure, noise and artifacts). Results are based on 494 images examined for 268 patients, including 225 prior images.   Results Whereas MAIQ was generally high, TAIQ was more variable. In multivariable models of sociodemographic predictors of TAIQ, less income was associated with lower TAIQ (p < 0.05). Among prior mammograms, lower TAIQ was subsequently associated with later stage at diagnosis, even after adjusting for multiple patient and practice factors (OR = 0.80, 95% CI: 0.65, 0.99).   Conclusions Considerable gains could be made in terms of increasing image quality through better positioning, compression and sharpness, gains that could impact subsequent stage at diagnosis.

Background
In the United States there is evidence that non-Hispanic (nH) Black women are more
likely to die from breast cancer compared to their nH White counterparts, despite
having a lower incidence of the disease. This mortality disparity is especially high
in Chicago, where most recent available data suggests that nH Black women die from
breast cancer at a two thirds higher rate than nH Whites [1]. Despite current controversies regarding the timing and frequency of
screening with mammography [2-6], it is generally recognized as effective in reducing morbidity and
mortality from breast cancer [7,8]. Despite reporting similar mammography utilization [9], Black and Hispanic women continue to be diagnosed at a later stage of
breast cancer compared to Whites [10] and this later stage is at least partly responsible for the greater
breast cancer mortality experienced by Black women in the United States as compared
to Whites.
Prior data from Chicago suggest that nH Black and Hispanic women were less likely
than nH Whites to obtain screening mammography at facilities with characteristics
suggesting high quality screening, which include academic facilities, facilities
that relied on breast imaging specialists, and facilities that offered digital
mammography [11]. These apparent disparities in the distribution of mammography practice
characteristics might result in a disparity in the quality of the process of
mammography screening and diagnostic follow-up. Racial/ethnic or socioeconomic
disparities in quality of mammogram images, radiologic interpretation of mammograms,
or timeliness of diagnostic follow-up and resolution of an abnormal mammogram might
be mediated by mammography practice characteristics. The goals of the present
analysis were to (1) examine whether better image quality was associated with
earlier breast cancer stage at diagnosis, and (2) examine whether there existed
disparities in image quality by race/ethnicity or socioeconomic status.
Our hypothesis was that racial and ethnic minorities and women of lower socioeconomic
status (less education and income, and lacking private health insurance) would tend
to be screened at lower resource facilities. These might include facilities not
situated in academic medical centers, that relied to a lesser extent on radiologist
and technologist specialists, and that tended to use analog as opposed to digital
mammography. Digital mammograms may tend to be of higher quality than analog images [12].
This unequal distribution of mammography practice characteristics might translate
into lower image quality for these women. We conceptualized image quality as having
two components, one related to the skill of the technologist and one related
primarily to mammography machine calibration. Lower image quality has been
associated with interval breast cancer, i.e., breast cancer presenting through
symptoms despite a recent normal-appearing screening mammogram [13]. Symptomatic breast cancer is considerably more likely to be later stage
than screen-detected breast cancer [14]; thus, image quality might be associated with stage at diagnosis and
might help to explain disparities in stage at diagnosis.

Materials and methods
Sample and procedure
Patients for this study were recruited from the parent study, "Breast
Cancer Care in Chicago", details of which have been previously published [15]. Briefly, female patients were eligible if they were diagnosed
between March 1, 2005 and February 31, 2008, diagnosed between 30 and 79 years
of age, resided in Chicago, had a first primary in situ or invasive breast
cancer, and self-identified as either non-Hispanic White, non-Hispanic Black or
Hispanic. All diagnosing facilities in the greater Chicago area
(N = 56) were visited monthly by certified tumor registrars employed
by the Illinois State Cancer Registry (ISCR) and all eligible newly diagnosed
cases were ascertained. Participants completed a 90-minute interview that was
administered either in English or Spanish as appropriate using computer-assisted
personal interview procedures. The final interview response rate was 56%
representing 989 completed interviews among eligible patients (397 nH White, 411
nH Black, 181 Hispanic, response rates 51%, 59% and 66%, respectively) [16]. Upon completion of the interview, patients were asked to provide
consent to allow abstraction of their medical records for information pertaining
to their breast cancer diagnosis, and asked to allow the study to obtain
original breast screening and diagnostic images for the mammography review
substudy. Both the main study and mammogram review substudy were reviewed and
approved by the University of Illinois at Chicago Office for the Protection of
Research Subjects.
Mammogram review substudy
Patients reporting either initial awareness of their breast cancer through
screening mammography or initial awareness through symptoms despite a prior
mammogram within 2 years of detection were eligible for this substudy
(N = 597). Of these, 369 (62%) consented to a review of their
mammogram and other breast images involved in their screening and diagnosis.
Original mammograms, diagnostic follow-up images and corresponding reports were
requested from screening and diagnostic facilities. Often, multiple facilities
were involved for a single patient. In all, we received 494 mammograms performed
on 268 patients. Approximately 90% of mammograms were bilateral, standard four
view mammograms, while the remainders were unilateral mammograms.
A single breast imaging specialist (EC) performed a blinded review of mammograms
(blinded to the original interpretation and all other subsequent screening and
diagnostic mammograms and results). All reviews were blinded to patient age,
race/ethnicity and other sociodemographic characteristics. Seven indicators of
image quality were assessed: positioning, compression, sharpness, contrast,
exposure, noise and artifacts [13,17]. Each was scored on a five-point Likert scale, where 4 and 5
represented good and excellent quality, respectively, while 1 represented poor
quality. The 273 participants were less likely than eligible nonparticipants to
be minority (46% vs. 64%, p < 0.0005) and more likely to report
symptomatic discovery (43% vs. 31%, p = 0.002), but were similar on
other characteristics.
Analysis variables
Variables for image quality
We defined a continuous measure of image quality that was a simple sum of the
7 indicators, with a theoretical range of 7 (lowest quality) to 35 (highest
quality). Results of analyses using this variable were similar to results
using the binary version described next, and therefore these results are not
presented. We defined a separate binary variable to indicate higher image
quality as those images that received a score of at least 4 (very good) on
all seven indicators. Positioning, compression, and sharpness are affected
by the patient-technologist interaction and the skill of the technologist,
whereas contrast, noise, exposure, and artifacts are primarily a function of
mammography machine calibration. Therefore, we defined two additional
measures of image quality. Higher technologist-associated image quality
(TAIQ) was defined as receiving a score of at least 4 (very good) on
positioning, compression, and sharpness, and a variable summing these three
measures was defined. Higher machine-associated image quality (MAIQ) was
defined as receiving a score of at least 4 (very good) on contrast, noise,
exposure, and artifacts, and a variable summing these four measures was
defined.
Measures of race/ethnicity and socioeconomic disadvantage
Race and ethnicity were self-reported at interview. Ethnicity was defined as
Hispanic if the patient self-identified as Hispanic, or reported a Latin
American country of origin for herself or for both of her biological parents.
Race and ethnicity were used to categorize patients as non-Hispanic White,
non-Hispanic Black or Hispanic. Socioeconomic disadvantage was defined from
self-reported annual household income, educational attainment, and health
insurance status. Income was reported at interview in categories of less than
$10,000, $20,000, $30,000, $40,000, $50,000, $75,000, $100,000, $150,000,
$200,000, and greater than $200,000. Annual household income analyzed as an
ordinal variable and also categorized for some analyses as not exceeding versus
exceeding $30,000. Formal education was reported in years, and was analyzed both
as an ordinal variable and categorized as not exceeding a high-school degree
versus having some post-secondary education. Health insurance status was
categorized as lacking private health insurance versus having any private health
insurance. Patients with Medigap or similar supplementary private health
insurance were defined as privately insured.
Mammography practice characteristics
Individual mammograms were defined with respect to image type as either digital
or analog (film screen). Although image type is an individual attribute of the
mammogram itself, it indicates something about the availability of digital
mammography and therefore we group it here with practice characteristics. All
mammography facilities included in these analyses were accredited by the
Mammography Quality Standards Act (MQSA). Mammography practices were grouped by
facility type into: (a) public, (b) private non-academic, (c) private with an
academic-affiliation, or (d) private university-based hospital or medical
center. For some analyses we dichotomized this variable to indicate whether a
facility was located within an academic hospital or medical center. Facility
data on the numbers and types of mammography technicians and radiologists were
available from a prior mammography facility survey of Chicago performed during
the study period [11]. Facilities reported the number of general radiologists and breast
imaging specialists interpreting mammographic studies. A breast imaging
specialist was defined as a radiologist who dedicated at least 75% of his/her
working time on breast imaging, regardless of fellowship training. We defined a
variable describing each facility's reliance on breast imaging specialists
as none, mixed, or sole reliance on specialists. We defined an analogous
variable to categorize facilities by the extent of their reliance on dedicated
mammography technologists (mixed vs. sole).
Clinical variables
Mode of breast cancer detection was defined as asymptomatic if the patient
reported initial awareness of the breast cancer through mammography or other
breast imaging in the absence of any symptoms, otherwise mode of detection was
defined as symptomatic. Stage at diagnosis was categorized using the AJCC
categories of 0, 1, 2, 3, and 4 ( http://www.cancerstaging.org/).
Statistical analyses
Statistical analyses were conducted using SAS version 9 (SAS Institute, Cary, NC)
and Stata version 11 (Statacorp, College Station, Texas). We tabulated the
observed distribution for each of the seven image quality indicators and
estimated polychoric correlations [18]. The percentage of higher image quality mammograms was tabulated
against patient characteristics and mammography practice characteristics, and
was repeated for higher technologist-associated image quality and higher
machine-associated image quality. Due to the greater variability of TA image
quality, only these associations are presented. P-values were estimated in
univariable logistic regressions using the Huber-White sandwich estimator to
adjust standard errors for clustering of images within patients.
Multivariable logistic regression of higher image quality
Due to the greater variability of TA image quality, we focused on these image
quality indicators in the analyses that follow. We conducted multivariable
logistic regression models in order to estimate associations with higher TA
image quality while using the Huber-White sandwich estimator to adjust standard
errors for clustering of images within patients. The first model (baseline
model) included terms for age and age squared. Next, we added variables for
race/ethnicity, income, education and private insurance status together. Through
backwards elimination procedures we removed those variables with a p-value
>0.10 via Wald tests.
Image quality indicators as predictors of stage at diagnosis
After excluding the index films and using data from only the prior films
(performed prior to any symptoms or diagnosis), we conducted multivariable
ordinal logistic regression to estimate associations for higher TA image quality
with breast cancer stage at diagnosis. Each image quality indicator was modeled
separately while adjusting for age, education, income, private health insurance
status, academic vs. other facility type and image type (analog vs. digital). We
estimated odds ratios from ordinal logistic regression models with robust
standard errors.

Results
Image quality
Results are based on 494 images examined for 268 patients. Very good or excellent
scores were less frequent for positioning, compression and sharpness (61, 66,
and 68%) than for contrast, exposure, artifacts and noise (86, 89, 90 and 96%,
respectively) (Table  1). As anticipated, polychoric
correlations between the seven mammography quality indicators were higher within
technologist-associated indicators (mean 0.86, range 0.79-0.94), and higher
within machine-associated indicators (mean 0.84, range 0.77-0.93), than between
technologist-associated and machine-associated indicators (mean 0.63, range
0.51-0.72) (Table  2).
Patient and practice characteristics predict lower image quality
Racial/ethnic and socioeconomic disadvantage were associated with lower TA image
quality (Table  3). The percentage of films that
received a score of 4 or 5 on all 3 TA indicators was greater for nH White than
minority patients (57% vs. 49%, p = 0.13), greater for patients
reporting higher vs. lower income (58% vs. 45%, p = 0.03), and
greater for patients with more than a high-school education than for those with
less education (58% vs. 46%, p = 0.04), but did not vary by private
health insurance status (Table  3). Better image
quality was considerably more likely for images performed at hospital-based,
academic facilities than at other types of facilities. The extent to which
facilities relied on full-time mammography technologists did not seem to be
associated with image quality. On the other hand, better image quality was
considerably more likely for images performed at facilities that relied solely
on breast imaging specialists than at facilities that did not (Table  3). Digital mammograms were considerably more likely to be
scored as high quality than analog images. Results were generally similar when
we examined all 7 indicators as a group. There was little variation in
machine-associated image quality indicators by racial/ethnicity or socioeconomic
status (results not shown).
Multivariable models of higher image quality
We conducted multivariable logistic regression in order to examine the extent to
which race/ethnicity and socioeconomic status were associated with image
quality. When racial/ethnic and socioeconomic variables were modeled together in
logistic regression models of higher image quality, only income was retained
(p-value for income = 0.001) while race/ethnicity, health insurance
status and education were not retained in the final model (Table  4). Results were very similar when modeling higher image
quality based solely on technologist-associated indicators (p-value for
income = 0.001), and again when modeling higher image quality based
solely on machine-associated indicators (p-value for income = 0.03);
in each instance, income and only income was retained (results not shown).
TA image quality predicts stage at diagnosis
In order to examine the extent to which variation in image quality was associated
with breast cancer stage at diagnosis, we conducted multivariable ordinal
logistic regression models. Higher image quality across all seven indictors
combined was inversely associated with breast cancer stage at diagnosis (OR =
0.91, 95% CI: 0.80, 1.03) (Table  5). Higher image
quality for technologist-associated indicators was associated with earlier stage
at diagnosis, whereas higher image quality for machine-associated indicators was
generally not associated with stage at diagnosis (Table  5).

Discussion
In our population-based sample of urban breast cancer patients, lower
technologist-associated image quality was associated with later breast cancer stage
at diagnosis, and patients with lower income were less likely to obtain high quality
mammography imaging. Our results suggest that differences in mammogram image quality
may be contributing to socioeconomic disparities in stage at diagnosis.
Most of the variation in image quality was due to quality indicators that would tend
to be associated with the skill of the technologist in working with the patient to
ensure proper positioning, adequate compression, minimizing blur (maximizing
sharpness), and performing the mammogram again if the quality of the image was
suboptimal. Mammography technologists who spend most or all of their time performing
mammograms may produce higher quality mammography images compared to technologists
whose duties are split, although there is little if any literature on this topic. We
anticipated that image quality would be better at facilities that relied solely on
dedicated mammography technologists, but we did not find any evidence to support
this expectation in the current study. We did find that mammogram images from
academic institutions and from institutions relying on breast imaging specialists
tended to be of higher quality. It may be that mammography technologists who work
alongside breast imaging specialists have greater opportunities to expand their
knowledge and expertise, or these settings may tend to hire more skilled
technologists to begin with. A specialized, high volume breast radiologist may be
better able to find cancers in images that are of lower quality than general
radiologist or one that reads fewer mammograms. A tendency for lower quality imaging
at non-academic facilities, in combination with less expertise available to read
those images, may result in less early detection and later stage at diagnosis.
Prior studies have found that digital mammogram images are more likely to be judged
as being higher quality compared to analog images [12]. In the present study, our expert consistently scored digital images as
being of higher quality across all seven image quality indicators. Since we were
unable to blind our expert as to whether an image being reviewed was analog or
digital, it is conceivable that a bias or preference towards digital images may have
resulted in an artificially higher image quality score for digital images, but this
seems unlikely. Nonetheless, after controlling for type of mammogram in our
analyses, lower income remained associated with lower quality imaging, and lower
technologist-associated image quality was in turn associated with later stage
diagnosis. Therefore, our results do not appear to be due to variation in the use of
digital versus analog mammography across the study sample.
The Mammography Quality Standards Act (MQSA) was passed in 1992 in an attempt to
improve the quality of breast cancer screening with mammography and provided basic
standards that have to be met in order for a facility to be certified under the Act [19]. These included standards relevant to image quality, including
mammography machine calibration and maintenance and qualifications of mammography
technologists. However, mammogram images are only required to be reviewed under MQSA
at least once every 3 years, and MQSA inspects only a small sample of images that
are hand-picked in advance by the facility. Therefore, it could be a simple matter
for a lower-performing institution to pass image quality inspection regardless of
actual practice.

Conclusions
We found that patients of higher socioeconomic status obtained higher quality images,
and higher quality images were in turn associated with earlier stage at diagnosis.
In particular, results suggest that considerable gains could be made in terms of
increasing image quality through better positioning, compression and sharpness,
which could translate into earlier stage at diagnosis for patients.

Pre-publication history
The pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed here:
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2407/13/208/prepub
