[Abstract, Introduction, Results, Discussion, Methods, Mixed]

PPARg maintains ERBB2-positive breast cancer stem cells. Overexpression of the adverse prognostic marker ERBB2 occurs in 30% of breast cancers and is associated with aggressive disease and poor outcomes. Our recent findings have shown that NR1D1 and the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-g (PPARg)-binding protein (PBP) act through a common pathway in upregulating several genes in the de novo fatty acid synthesis network, which is highly active in ERBB2-positive breast cancer cells. NR1D1 and PBP are functionally related to PPARg, a well-established positive regulator of adipogenesis and lipid storage. Here, we report that inhibition of the PPARg pathway reduces the aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH)-positive population in ERBB2-positive breast cancer cells. Results from in vitro tumorsphere formation assays demonstrate that the PPARg antagonists GW9662 and T0070907 decrease tumorsphere formation in ERBB2-positive cells, but not other breast cells. We show that the mechanism by which GW9662 treatment causes a reduction in ALDH-positive population cells is partially due to ROS, as it can be rescued by treatment with N-acetyl-cysteine. Furthermore, global gene expression analyses show that GW9662 treatment suppresses the expression of several lipogenic genes, including ACLY, MIG12, FASN and NR1D1, and the stem-cell related genes KLF4 and ALDH in BT474 cells. Antagonist treatment also decreases the level of acetylation in histone 3 and histone 4 in BT474 cells, compared with MCF7 cells. In vivo, GW9662 pre-treatment inhibits the tumor-seeding ability of BT474 cells. Together, these results show that the PPARg pathway is critical for the cancer stem cell properties of ERBB2-positive breast cancer cells.

Introduction
Overexpression of the ERBB2 oncogene is one of the most clinically relevant genetic changes in breast cancer. Occurring in approximately 30% of breast cancers, it is strongly associated with increased disease recurrence and a worse prognosis.1 Trastuzumab, a monoclonal antibody that targets the extracellular domain of ERBB2, is used to treat cancers where ERBB2 is overexpressed. However, when used as single-agent therapy in ERBB2-positive breast cancer patients, response rates are only 11-26%.2
Cancer stem cells (CSCs) have been identified as subpopulations of cells within tumors that drive tumor growth and recurrence.3, 4, 5 CSCs have many features, including self-renewal and resistance to chemo- and radiation therapy, which lead to the failure of many current cancer treatments.6, 7, 8, 9 Studies have shown that the CD44+/CD24-low cell subpopulation, which is enriched with breast CSCs, are resistant to trastuzumab treatment.10, 11, 12 This may explain why the efficacy of trastuzumab therapy is limited, as this treatment does not kill CSCs, which survive to form a new tumor. For this reason, new drugs that selectively target CSCs, combined with trastuzumab therapy, may offer great promise for ERBB2-positive breast cancer treatment.
Recent work has shown that transcriptional regulators overexpressed in cells carrying the ERBB2 amplicon cooperatively change the metabolism of ERBB2-positive breast cancer cells inducing a unique, Warburg-like metabolism that is primed towards fat production.13
PBP and NR1D1, two genes tightly linked to ERRB2 on chromosome 17, have essential roles in ERBB2-positive breast cancer cells but not other breast cancer cells or normal breast epithelial cells.14
NR1D1 and PBP are tightly linked to ERBB2 and frequently reside on the 17q12-21 amplicons found in ERBB2-positive tumors.15, 16 Several studies have shown that irrespective of the amplicon size they are consistently co-overexpressed with ERBB217, 18 and are among the six genes that comprise the 'ERBB2 gene expression signature' seen in breast cancers.19
PBP is a co-activator of PPARg and plays a positive role in its transcription initiation activity. NR1D1 is a target of PPARg and has also been shown to positively regulate PPARg expression. At least one critical role of PPARg in ERBB2-positive breast cancer cells is to prevent the palmitate-induced lipotoxicity20 that is a consequence of the high levels of lipids they synthesize. PPARg is a member of the nuclear hormone transcription factor family that controls the expression of a large number of genes involved in adipogenesis, energy metabolism, proliferation and tumor progression.21, 22, 23, 24, 25 PPARg is the major expressed subtype of its family in the mammary gland and in primary and metastatic breast cancer.26, 27, 28, 29 Although recent studies have noted interactions of PPARg-targeting drugs with ERBB2 signaling14, 20, 30 and ERBB2-positve breast cancer survival,31 there is not, however, a definitive view of the interactions between these pathways and potential mechanisms. The effects of PPARg activity in CSCs have been studied in a variety of cancers such as colorectal cancer, hepatocellular carcinoma, lung cancer, glioma and leukemia.32, 33, 34, 35, 36 Constitutively active PPARg mutants in ERBB2-induced mammary tumor models enhanced tumor growth by increasing endothelial stem cells.37 However, the effects of inhibition of PPARg on ERBB2-positive breast CSCs have not been investigated.
In this study, we report that PPARg inhibition selectively removes CSC-like cells from ERBB2-positive breast cancer cell populations by increasing ROS and altering the expression of lipogenic and stem cell-related genes. We also show that the PPARg antagonist, GW9662, effectively blocks tumor formation in an animal model. Our results support a potential therapeutic strategy for preventing human ERBB2-positive breast cancer progression.

Results
ERBB2-positive breast cancer cells possess high levels of fat and aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH)-positive cells
Metabolic regulators, NR1D1 and PBP, have been identified as novel survival factors for breast cancer cells with the ERBB2 signature. These two genes are involved in upregulating several genes in the de novo fatty acid synthesis network, which has been shown to be highly active in ERBB2-positive breast cancer cells.14 As shown in Figure 1a, stains of neutral fat show that ERBB2-positive breast cancer cells contain relatively high levels of neutral fats. These cells have an approximately 20-fold increased level of accumulated fat in lipid stores when compared with MCF-10A and a 10-fold increase when compared with MCF7 cells. ERBB2 is regarded as a breast cancer marker for aggressive tumor growth and metastasis, and as a gene that drives asymmetrical cell division. In addition, it has been shown that ERBB2 is an important regulator of subpopulations of breast cancer cells that display stem cell features and increases the frequency of tumor-initiating cells or CSCs.38 Staining ERBB2-positive breast cancer cells with Aldefluor39 shows that these cells have a higher percentage of cells in the CSC population. Cells from the ERBB2-positive breast cancer lines BT474 and SKBR3 exhibit an ~18-fold increase of ALDH-positive cells when compared with MCF-10A or MCF7 cells (Figure 1b). In addition, quantification of the side populations (SPs) present in these lines shows that ERBB2-positive breast cancer cells contain more SP cells when compared with MCF-10A or MCF7 cells (Figure 1c and Supplementary Figure 1).
Although we have shown previously that increased expression of PBP and NR1D1 leads to increased fat production in these cells,14 part of the genetic basis of the CSC and fat content phenotypes may rest with ERBB2 itself. A number of studies have noted correlations between ERBB2 and several aspects of fat metabolism.25, 40, 41, 42 Although several groups have proposed potential regulatory interactions of fatty acid synthase (FASN) and ERBB2, a clear picture has not yet emerged.40, 43 In testing the contribution of ERBB2 itself to the CSC and fat content phenotypes, we find that MCF-10A cells carrying a retrovirus expressing constitutively active ERBB2 show a three- to fourfold increase in fats. In agreement with other studies,38 these cells exhibit a two- to threefold increase in the Aldefluor-positive population compared to vector control cells (Figure 1d and Supplementary Figure 2). Treatment with trastuzumab reduces the fat storage and ALDH-positive population in both ERBB2-positive BT474 and SKBR3 cell lines (Supplementary Figure 3). Although the fraction of cells in the CSC population and the levels of fat storage in MCF-10A-neu cells are significantly less than those seen in ERBB2-positive cell lines, the results suggest, in accord with other studies,25, 38, 40, 41, 42 that ERRB2 itself has some role in these processes.
PPARg inhibition results in decreased CSCs in ERBB2-positive cancer cells
Although ERBB2-positive breast cancer cells have amplifications of the ERBB2 gene, they have also been shown to possess higher levels of PPARg activity, which enable them to convert fatty acids to triglycerides, averting the apoptosis that results from lipotoxicity.20 PPARg blockade using the PPARg antagonist GW9662 results in increased apoptosis in the general population of ERBB2-positive BT474 and SKBR3 breast cancer cells, in a time- (Figure 2a) and dose-dependent manner20 (and data not shown). There is no significant effect on ERBB2-normal MCF7 (Figure 2a), normal MCF-10A or MCF-10A-neu cells at these drug concentrations. Genetic and pharmacological experiments point to the concerted effort of several PPARg-regulated processes--the diversion of precursors, synthesis of fatty acids, and their processing and storage as triglycerides13, 20--that are important to these cells. Consistent with this notion, inhibition of the entire pathway has greater effects on ERBB2-positive cells. The FASN inhibitor C75 causes death of ERBB2-positive breast cancer cells when cells are treated with 40 mM C75 for the indicated times. At the concentrations tested, C75 is about twice as toxic to ERBB2-positive cells as the other cell lines, whereas GW9662 is about five times more toxic to the ERBB2-positive cells (Figure 2a).
We next examined the potential linkage of the increased CSC and increased fat storage phenotypes. The effect of PPARg inhibition on CSC populations was tested by monitoring changes in ALDH expression or tumorsphere formation. Interestingly, we find that GW9662 drastically decreases the ALDH-positive population in both BT474 and SKBR3 cells (Figure 2b). In contrast, C75 causes a less than twofold increase in the ALDH-positive population of either BT474 or SKBR3 cells (Figure 2b, right panel). There is a stepwise decrease in the proportion of ALDH-positive BT474 cells from 16.6 to 2.4% when cells are treated with different concentrations of GW9662 (Figure 2c). These results suggest that GW9662 decreases the ALDH-positive cell population in a dose-dependent manner. To further confirm the ability of GW9662 treatment to decrease the CSC population in ERBB2-positive breast cancer cells, we performed tumorsphere culture experiments using both BT474 and MCF7 cells. We find that BT474, SKBR3 and UACC812 cells pre-treated with GW9662 form fewer tumorspheres compared with the cells treated with vehicle (Figure 2d and Supplementary Figure 4). In contrast, GW9662 has no effect on MCF7 tumorsphere formation (Figure 2d). Taken together, these results indicate that GW9662 selectively causes cell death in CSC-like ERBB2-positive breast cancer cell populations.
Previous studies have demonstrated that the importance of the fatty acid synthesis signaling pathway to the survival of ERBB2-positive cancer cells is not due to the amount of fat that is stored within the cell or its use as an energy source, but rather due to the synthetic process itself.14 PPARg has been shown to regulate a number of metabolic processes related to this phenotype, including fatty acid b-oxidation, glucose utilization, cholesterol transport and energy balance.22 To extend our findings to other PPARg antagonists or agonists, we examined the effect of another antagonist, T0070907, and an agonist rosiglitazone on the ALDH-positive population of ERBB2-positive breast cancer cells. Although the PPARg agonist rosiglitazone has little effect on cell death, the PPARg antagonist, T0070907, causes significant cell death and has essentially the same effect on cell survival as GW9662 (Figure 3a). We next determined the effects of rosiglitazone and T0070907 on the ALDH-positive population in BT474 cells. Rosiglitazone causes a slight increase in the ALDH-positive population compared with cells treated with vehicle. In contrast, T0070907, like GW9662, causes a significant decrease of the ALDH-positive population (Figure 3b). To further confirm this result, we performed tumorsphere assays. BT474 cells pre-treated with rosiglitazone form a slightly greater number of tumorspheres compared with cells pre-treated with vehicle. In contrast, T0070907 and GW9662 both reduce the number of tumorspheres (Figure 3b). As GW9662 is a PPARg antagonist, it is likely that GW9662 directly regulates the activity of PPARg in breast cancer cells. We find that PPARg expression levels are higher when compared with MCF10A or MCF7 cells (Figure 3c). To exclude the possibility that GW9662 affects ERBB2 activity, we monitored ERBB2 phosphorylation by immunoblotting with a phosphotyrosine-specific antibody (p-Her2 Y1221/1222) after treatment of BT474 or SKBR3 cells with GW9662 or rosiglitazone. We find that neither GW9662 nor rosiglitazone affects ERBB2 activity (Figure 3c). To rule out potential off-target effects of GW9662, we overexpressed wild-type or mutant PPARg-dominant negative (DN) gene constructs in MCF7 and BT474 cells, respectively. Consistent with the pharmacological results, we find that PPARg-DN reduces the ALDH-positive population in BT474 cells (Figure 3d). These results demonstrate that PPARg activity is important not only for cell survival,20, 44 but, specifically, also for CSC maintenance in ERBB2-positive breast cancer cells. Moreover, the contribution of PPARg activity to fat synthesis and CSC maintenance appears to be significantly greater than the effects of ERRB2 in populations of ERBB2-positive breast cancer cells.
GW9662 toxicity in ERBB2-positive CSCs is due in part to production of ROS
We next examined the mechanism of the reduction seen in the ALDH-positive population caused by inhibition of PPARg activity. As PPARg inhibition in ERBB2-positive breast cancer cells has been shown to result in ROS production and subsequent cell death,20 we determined whether ROS were involved in the selective loss of CSC-like cells. ROS production after cells were treated with GW9662 was assayed using DCF-DA staining. L-S,R-buthionine sulfoximine (BSO), which inhibits glutamate-cysteine ligase, was used as positive control for increasing ROS production. We observe increased ROS production following the GW9662 treatment in BT474 cells compared to cells treated with vehicle. The production of ROS induced by GW9662 was 60% of that caused by BSO (Figures 4a and b). As ROS have been linked to cell death and CSC survival, the potential involvement of ROS as the cause of cell death and decreased ALDH-positive population in ERBB2-positive breast cancer cells during PPARg inhibition was tested. BT474 cells were treated with GW9662 or BSO together with the antioxidant N-acetyl-cysteine (NAC) or vehicle. NAC has been shown previously to rescue ERBB2-positive breast cancer cells from GW9662-induced apoptosis.20 As shown in Figure 4, NAC also reverses the loss of cells in the ALDH-positive population of ERBB2-positive breast cancer cells. However, as NAC almost completely reverses the effects of BSO on both cell death (Figure 4c) and decreases in the ALDH-positive population (Figure 4d), it seems likely that additional players must exist in the mechanism of toxicity of GW9662. Nevertheless, these results suggest that PPARg inhibition by GW9662-induced cell death and the decrease in ALDH-positive population in ERBB2-positive breast cancer cells is partially due to ROS.
GW9662 treatment affects lipogenic and stem cell related gene expression in BT474 cells
PPARg is a transcription factor that controls the expression of genes that regulate multiple cellular events. Microarray analysis was performed to identify PPARg targets that might be involved in the GW9662-dependent decrease in the ALDH-positive populations of EBRR2-positive breast cancer cells. BT474 cells were treated with a sublethal concentration (10 mM) of GW9662 or vehicle for 9 days. This analysis showed that the expression levels of lipogenic genes (ACLY, MIG12, FASN and NR1D1) are low in BT474 cells treated with GW9662 compared with vehicle. Although the expression level of acetyl-CoA carboxylase-a, the first committed enzyme in the fatty acid synthesis pathway, does not change, its kinase activity modulator MIG12 was suppressed significantly by GW9662 (Figure 5a). These results suggest that PPARg targets, including several related to fat synthesis and storage, have a role in maintaining CSC in ERBB2-positive breast cancer cells. To test the lipogenic gene expression profile in stem-like cells in ERBB2-positive breast cancer cells, we isolated ALDH-positive and ALDH-negative populations of BT474 cells. The expression of genes in isolated cells was confirmed by qRT-PCR. We find that ACLY, ACACA and FASN are overexpressed in BT474 ALDH-positive populations compared to ALDH-negative populations (Figure 5b). In addition, we find that the expression levels of KLF4 and ALDH are downregulated in BT474 cells treated with GW9662 compared with controls (Figure 5c upper panel). To further test the effects of GW9662, rosiglitazone and C75 on KLF4 and ALDH protein expression levels, we performed immunoblots. Rosiglitazone has little effect on levels of either protein, whereas C75 increases the expression of KLF4 and ALDH. However, GW9662 decreases their expression (Figure 5c lower panel). These results may suggest that GW9662 decreases the ALDH-positive population by reducing the expression of KLF4 and ALDH. Acetyl-CoA derived from glucose and ATP-citrate lyase (ACLY) activity is a critical reactant in chromatin modification and the resulting changes in gene expression that control cell lineage or fate.45 Acetyl-CoA is also a key metabolite in lipogenesis, and therefore represents a key link between lipogensis and chromatin modification. To test whether GW9662 has effects on chromatin modification, we analyzed the histone acetylation status of BT474 and MCF-7cells treated with GW9662 or vehicle (Figure 5d). We find that GW9662 decreases the amount of histone H3 and H4 acetylation in BT474 cells, which have high expression levels and activities of ACLY. In contrast, GW9662 has less of an effect on histone acetylation in MCF-7 cells. Taken together, these results suggest that inhibition of PPARg activity decreases the ALDH-positive population of ERBB2-positive breast cancer cells by downregulating the stem-cell maintenance gene expression program through chromatin modification.
Effects of GW9662 treatment on tumor seeding and growth in vivo
These molecular experiments carried out in vitro pointed to the possibility that GW9662 treatment might be useful in decreasing the CSC population in ERBB2-positive breast cancer cells and inhibiting tumor progression. To test this possibility, we assessed the functional presence of tumor stem-like cells by determining the tumor-seeding ability in vivo. For these experiments, BT474 cells were treated with the sublethal concentration of 10 mM GW9662 in vitro for 9 days, and then injected into mice. GW9662 pre-treatment results in a significant decrease in both BT474 cells' tumor-seeding ability and in ultimate tumor size compared to vehicle pre-treatment (Figures 6a-c). These results indicate that GW9662 pre-treatment decreases the number of functional tumor stem-like cells. In contrast, GW9662 had no effect on the tumor formation and growth of MCF-7 cells (data not shown). Tumors from animals orthotopically injected with GW9662 pre-treated or vehicle-treated cells have essentially the same levels of expression of ERRB2 as determined with immunofluorescence microscopy (Figure 6d). Importantly, tumors from animals receiving vehicle pre-treated cells have more ALDH-positive staining cells than tumors from animals receiving GW9662 pre-treated cells, although these cells are rare in either case. These results support our above findings that BT474 cells pre-treated with GW9662 form both fewer and smaller tumors in vivo. These results confirm the utility of GW9662 in selectively removing CSC-like cells from ERBB2-positive breast cancer cell populations, and thereby reducing tumor formation in vivo. These results also provide a strong rationale for the use of GW9662 for chemoprevention of ERBB2-positive breast cancer progression.

Discussion
In this report, we have shown that ERBB2-positive breast cancer cells have increased fat stores and ALDH-positive cell populations compared with other breast cancer cells or normal breast epithelial cells. Inhibition of PPARg leads to a significant decrease of the ALDH-positive cell population, specifically in ERBB2-positive breast cancer cells, which have as a general feature increased expression of the adipogenesis-related transcription factors NR1D1 and PBP in addition to ERBB2.14 The results suggest that PPARg has a larger role in maintaining CSC populations than ERRB2 in these cells. Our results also indicate that this phenomenon is explained by downregulation of stem cell-related gene expression and involves ROS-mediated cell death. Finally, we have provided evidence that the tumor-seeding ability of ERBB2-positive breast cancer cells is dramatically decreased by PPARg antagonist treatment. This work has revealed a potential clinically significant application of GW9662 in targeting ERBB2-positive breast CSCs.
Increased activity of the lipogenesis pathway is a hallmark of cancer cells. This is especially true in ERBB2-positive human breast cancer cells, which have a high degree of fat storage.14, 46 We have previously shown that PPARg is essential for the survival of ERBB2-positive breast cancer cells. Its targets function in the unique metabolism of these cells preventing the high levels of palmitate produced from becoming toxic.20 PPARg is expressed in many tissues and regulates lipid metabolism, glucose homoeostasis and tumor progression. It has emerged as a potential target for cancer therapy although its utility is highly tumor specific.47 Several studies have shown that its activation promotes cell cycle arrest, apoptosis and differentiation in many human tumors and inhibits invasion and metastasis of human breast cancer cells.48, 49 Still other studies have demonstrated that PPARg antagonists have more potent anticancer effects than agonists in some epithelial cancer cell lines.50 In the case of ERBB2-positive breast cancer cells, especially those with amplification of the 17q12-q21 region that contains ERBB2, NR1D1 and PBP (Supplementary Table 1), it appears that PPARg has a critical role in the Warburg-like glycolytic metabolism operative in these cells. To maintain a high flux through glycolysis, NAD+ must be regenerated. Many highly proliferative stem and cancer cells meet this need by converting pyruvate to lactate at high rates. Our recent findings have shown that the overexpression of PBP and NR1D1 genes found in ERBB2-positive breast cancer cells causes the upregulation of de novo fatty acid synthesis, enabling these cells to regenerate NAD+ indirectly by oxidizing NADPH during fatty acid synthesis.13, 14
The PPARg-signaling pathway has been shown to be involved in fate determination in a wide range of stem cells. Regulation of PPARg activation inhibits growth and expansion of brain tumor stem cells.32 PPARg also regulates KLF4 expression, a key gene for pluripotent stem cells.51, 52 Recent animal studies have shown that GW9662 enhances the chemopreventive effect of anti-estrogen therapy in mammary tumors, which suggests that GW9662 promotes breast CSCs' differentiation into tumors that exhibit higher ER expression and resulting responsiveness to the ER antagonist fulvestrant.53 Our studies have shown that GW9662 supresses KLF4 expression (Figure 5c). This may lead to stem cell program gene expression changes in ERBB2-positive breast CSCs and sensitize the cells to ROS. It will be intriguing to test how GW9662 cooperates with traditional therapy to treat ERBB2-positive breast cancer. Our ongoing experiments are investigating the effect of GW9662 with trastuzumab on ERBB2-positive breast CSCs.
The increased activity of the lipogenesis pathway in ERBB2-positive human breast CSCs has parallels in other stem cell types. Developmental studies in embryos have underscored the involvement of lipogenesis in the proliferation of stem cells. The cytoplasm of oocytes and embryos of some mammals are rich with lipids and fatty acids54 that serve as precursors for membrane biosynthesis and substrates for energy production. The concentration of triglycerides decreases significantly during embryo development because of increased utilization of endogenous stored lipids via b-oxidation.55 During tumor metastasis, CSCs seed distal organs after extravasation and produce new tumors. The rapid proliferation in an unstructured cellular environment is reminiscent of early steps in embryo development. In addition, studies have shown that many lipid molecules are present at different levels in the ESCs compared to neurons and cardiomyocytes. Various lipids and fatty acids can regulate the proliferation and differentiation of pluripotent stem cells and adult progenitors. Our results showed that GW9662 decrease the ALDH-positive cell population in ERBB2-positive breast cancer cells. These exciting results may provide evidence that glycolytic flux or metabolites can regulate the CSC phenotype.
Finally, our results indicate that increased flux through the fatty acid synthetic pathway may have direct mechanistic implications for ERBB2-positive breast CSCs. ACLY, which generates acetyl-CoA from mitochondria-derived citrate for lipogenesis, is a key enzyme for tumor cells.56 ACLY and its production of acetyl-CoA have been shown to regulate histone acetylation and chromatin remodeling.45
ACLY is a downstream target of PPARg.14 We predicted that PPARg antagonist GW9662 can inhibit ACLY expression and regulate histone acetylation status. Our results have shown that GW9662 indeed affects histone H3 and H4 acetylation levels in ERBB2-positive breast cancer cells but not in other cells. These results suggest that chromatin remodeling by histone acetylation status is one potential reason that changes in gene expression occur after GW9662 treatment. Transcription profile changes in ERBB2-positive breast cancer cells may trigger reprogramming of CSCs, which ultimately results in a loss of cells from the CSC population after GW9662 treatment. Clearly, more work will be required to establish this linkage.
In summary, we have reported that GW9662 treatment induced decrease of CSCs in ERBB2-positive human breast cancer cells by upregulation of intracellular ROS and inhibition of the lipogenesis pathway. We have also shown that GW9662 pre-treatment can inhibit tumor formation in an animal model. Our results provide a rationale for using PPARg antagonist GW9662 as a new treatment for ERBB2-positive human breast cancer.

Materials and methods
Cell culture and chemicals.
Breast cancer cell lines and MCF-10A were obtained from American Type Culture Collection. All cell lines were cultured in DMEM (Hyclone, Logan, UT, USA) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS; Hyclone) and 100 U/ml of penicillin-streptomycin (Cellgro, Manassas, VT, USA), except for MCF-10A cells cultured as indicated in Debnath et al.57 To generate the MCF-10A cell line that expresses Her2, pLXSN-neu or vector control retroviruses were used to infect MCF-10A cells. The Flag-PPARg (plasmid # 8895) and Flag-PPARg E499Q (plasmid # 8896) are from Addgene.58 The PPARg antagonists GW9662 and T0070907, agonist rosiglitazone, and the FASN inhibitor C75 were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich, (St Louis, MO, USA). Cell counts were performed after growing cells in 96-well plates, fixing with 4% formaldehyde and counterstaining nuclei with Hoechst 33342. Images of cells were acquired using an In Cell Analyzer 1000 (GE Healthcare, Piscataway, NJ, USA) high-content imaging system. At least 30 fields were imaged per well for cell number determination. Statistics were performed using the In Cell Investigator 3.4 image analysis software (GE Healthcare).
Measurement of ROS production
ROS was measured as previously described using H2DCF-DA (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA). The fluorescence signal was detectable at an excitation wavelength of 488 nm and emission wavelength of 535 nm with FACS Canto flow cytometer (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA, USA). For treatment with GW9662 and BSO, cells were incubated with GW9662 (Sigma-Aldrich) at 10 mM or BSO at 1 mM for 9 days.
Aldefluor assay
The ALDEFLUOR kit (StemCell Technologies, Vancouver, BC, Canada) was used to isolate the population with a high ALDH enzymatic activity. Cells were suspended in ALDEFLUOR assay buffer containing ALDH substrate (BAAA, 1 mmol/l per 1 x 106 cells) and incubated during 45 min at 37 degC. As a negative control for each sample of cells an aliquot was treated with 50 mmol/l diethylaminobenzaldehyde, a specific ALDH inhibitor. The gates were established using as negative controls the ALDEFLUOR-stained cells treated with diethylaminobenzaldehyde.
SP and cell sorting
The SP analysis based on Hoechst 33342 (Sigma-Aldrich) staining was performed as previously described.59, 60 Briefly, cells were collected and re-suspended in warm culture medium (106 cells/ml). Hoechst 33342 was added at a final concentration of 5 mg/ml; as control reactions, Verapamil (Sigma-Aldrich) was added at a final concentration of 50 mM in the presence of Hoechst 33342. Cells were incubated at 37 degC for 90 min with intermittent mixing. After incubation, cells were washed and re-suspended in ice-cold PBS containing 2% fetal bovine serum (Invitrogen). Cells were stained with propidium iodide (2 mg/ml, Sigma-Aldrich) to determine viability, then analyzed and sorted by flow cytometry.
Tumorsphere assay
Mammosphere culture was performed as previously described. Cells were treated with GW9662 or vehicle for the indicated days. Single cells were plated in ultra-low attachment plates (StemCell Technologies), at a density of 5000 cells/ml. For counting mammospheres, the content of all wells was collected, pooled and transferred on a collagen-coated dish, in differentiating medium (see below). Mammospheres adhered in these conditions in approximately 48 h, after which they were counted under low magnification.
Metabolic assays
For detection of neutral fat stores, cells were stained with 1 mg/ml4,4-difluoro-1,3,5,7,8-pentamethyl-4-bora-3a,4a-diaza-s-indacence (BODIPY 493/503; Molecular Probes, Grand Island, NY, USA). Cells were grown on 96-well plates, fixed with 4% formaldehyde, stained with 1 mg/ml BODIPY 493/503 and counterstained for nuclei with Hoechst 33342. Cells were imaged and analyzed using the In Cell analyzer 1000-In Cell Investigator 3.4 system.
Immunofluoresence
Mouse breast cancer tissue sections were baked for 1 h at 62 degC, subjected to serial alcohol rehydration and microwaved in 0.01 M sodium citrate for 20 min for antigen retrieval. The sections were serum blocked for 30 min, incubated overnight at 4 degC with first antibodies in phosphate-buffered saline and subsequently with Cy3-labeled secondary antibodies for 30 min; the nucleus was stained with Hoechst 33342. The stained sections were mounted with anti-fade solution for microscopy.
Animal experiments
NOD/SCID mice were purchased from Jackson Lab (The Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, ME, USA). All mouse procedures were approved by the Animal Care and Use Committees of SUNY Albany and performed in accordance with institutional policies.
For xenograft tumor-seeding studies, the indicated numbers of BT474 cells pre-treated with vehicle or 10 mM GW9662 for 9 days were suspended in 50 ml Matrigel (BD Biosciences) diluted 1:2 with DMEM and injected into mammary fat pad. Tumor formation was assayed by palpation. The tumor volume in mm3 is calculated by the formula: volume=(width)2 x length/2.
Quantitative real time reverse transcription-PCR
These assays were carried out essentially as described previously.61 Primers used for qRT-PCR were as follows: for ATP citrate lyase (ACLY), 5'-AAGATCTCGTGGCCAATGGA-3' (forward) and 5'-AGGTTTGCGGATCAAACCAA-3' (reverse); for acetyl-CoA carboxylase-a (ACACA), 5'-CTTTGTGCCCACGGTTATCA-3' (forward) and 5'-AGTGGTCCCTGTTTGTCTCCA-3' (reverse); for midline-1-interacting G12-like protein (MIG12), 5'-AACGTCCGCGCGGCCACC-3' (forward) and 5'-GTGGCCCCAATTGCCGAAG-3' (reverse); for fatty acid synthase (FASN), 5'-GAACTCCTTGGCGGAAGAGAA-3' (forward) and 5'-GCGAGAAGTCAACACGAGCTT-3' (reverse); for nuclear receptor subfamily 1, group D, member 1 (NR1D1), 5'-CCGTGACCTTTCTCAGCATGA-3' (forward) and 5'-CACTGTCTGGTCCTTCACGTT-3' (reverse); for glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH), 5'-GCAAATCCATGGCACCGT-3'(forward) and 5'-TCGCCCCACTTGATTTTGG-3' (reverse). Product levels were calculated after normalization with GAPDH control.

Immunoblotting
Immunoblotting was performed essentially as described previously.61 Equal amounts of proteins were used. Antibodies used were anti-ALDH (1:1000, BD Biosciences), anti-KLF4 (1:1000, Sigma), anti-Histone H3, H4 antibody, anti-acetyl-Histone H3 (lys9) (1:1000, Cell Signaling, Technology, Danvers, MA ,USA), anti-acetyl-Histone H3, H4 antibodies (1:1000, Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA), anti-Flag antibody (1:1000, Sigma), anti-rabbit IgG-HRP and mouse IgG-HRP (1:5000, Jackson ImmunoResearch, West Grove, PA, USA).
