[Abstract, Methods, Results, Discussion]

Site-specific CpG methylation in the CCAAT/enhancer binding protein delta (CEBPd) CpG island in breast cancer is associated with metastatic relapse. Background: The CCAAT/enhancer binding protein delta (CEBPd) is a member of a highly conserved family of basic region leucine zipper transcription factors. It has properties consistent with a tumour suppressor; however, other data suggest that CEBPd may be involved in the metastatic process.   Methods: We analysed the expression of CEBPd and the methylation status of the CpG island in human breast cancer cell lines, in 107 archival cases of primary breast cancer and in two series of metastatic breast cancers using qPCR and pyrosequencing.   Results: Expression of CEBPd is downregulated in primary breast cancer by site-specific methylation in the CEBPd CpG island. Expression is also downregulated in 50% of cases during progression from primary carcinoma to metastatic lesions. The CEBPd CpG island is methylated in 81% metastatic breast cancer lesions, while methylation in the CEBPd CpG island in primary cancers is associated with increased risk of relapse and metastasis.   Conclusion: CCAAT/enhancer binding protein delta CpG island methylation is associated with metastasis in breast cancer. Detection of methylated CEBPd genomic DNA may have utility as an epigenetic biomarker of primary breast carcinomas at increased risk of relapse and metastasis.

Materials and Methods
Breast cancer cell lines
Breast carcinoma cell lines SKBR3, MDA-MB231, MDA-MB 453, MDA-MB468, MDA-MB 435, MCF7, T47D, ZR75.1, HCC1937, HS578 were grown as described previously (Shah et al, 2009).
Two series of cases were analysed in the study. The first was 107 primary breast carcinomas. The characteristics of this patient population are shown in Table 1. These cases were randomly selected from the tissue archives of S. Croce General Hospital, Cuneo, Italy. For all 107 cases, genomic DNA was available and was analysed by pyrosequencing for CEBPd CpG island methylation. For 26 of the 107 cases, mRNA was available and was used to analyse CEBPd expression by qPCR. At the time of the study, metastatic relapse had occurred in 31 of the 107 patients. For 14 of 31 relapsed cases, tissue from the metastasis was available and was analysed in parallel with matched tissue from the primary cancer for CEBPd expression. The second series comprised 21 central nervous system (CNS) metastatic lesions from Imperial Healthcare NHS Trust. These cases were identified from the neuropathology archives at Charing Cross Hospital, London. Tissue was originally obtained at neurosurgical resection of intracranial disease in patients with a pre-existing diagnosis of breast cancer and was confirmed by histopathology to be metastatic breast cancer. Genomic DNA from this series was analysed by pyrosequencing for CEBPd CpG island methylation. The study received ethical committee approval in both centres. In all cases, the original diagnosis and adequate representation of neoplastic tissue was confirmed by histopathological review prior to inclusion in the study. Expression of the oestrogen receptor (ER), the progesterone receptor and HER2 was determined according to local protocols.
Analysis of CEBPd expression
Total RNA was extracted from formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue using Recover All kit (Ambion, Carlsbad, CA, USA). cDNA was synthesised from 1 mg total RNA using the High Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription kit (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). For demethylation, cells were treated with 5 m 5'azacytidine (Sigma, Gillingham, UK) for 7 days. Cells were split every 2-3 days with the addition of fresh drug. After drug treatment, cells were harvested for qPCR. For qPCR analysis, 25-ml PCRs were performed using 50 ng of cDNA obtained by reverse transcription. Amplification and analysis were done according to the manufacturer's protocol in 96-well plates in an ABI PRISM 7000 Sequence Detection System (Applied Biosystems) and using the pre-cast 'TaqMan Gene Expression Assays' (Applera, https://products.appliedbiosystems.com/) for CEBPd (Hs00270931_s1). Quantification of target transcripts was performed in comparison to the reference transcript b2-microglobulin (Hs99999907_m1) using the 'DDCt method for comparing relative expression results in real-time PCR' as outlined by PE Applied Biosystems (Perkin Elmer, Forster City, CA, USA).
Pyrosequencing
Genomic DNA was extracted from cellular pellets and FFPE sections using the DNeasy Mini kit (Qiagen, Crawley, UK) according to the manufacturer's instructions, and from 10 micron sections of FFPE using phenol with the traditional protocol. Methylation in the CpG island of CEBPd was analysed by pyrosequencing technology, which allows the quantification of the degree of methylation at each CG site through the calculation of the ratio between T and C. PCR primers were as follows:
Forward: BIOT-5'-GGAGTGTTGGTAGAGGGAG-3'
Reverse: 5'-CCCTAAAAACCCCCAACCC-3'.
The PCR conditions were as follows: 95degC for 10 min, 95degC for 30 s, 58degC for 30 s, 72degC for 40 s for 40 cycles, 72degC for 7 min. The PCR products were then analysed by pyrosequencing using the Sample Prep kit (Diatech, Jesi, Italy).
After pyrosequencing, analysis of percentage methylation at each CG was determined using Pyromark Q CpG Software (Qiagen, Venlo, The Netherland). DNA from five normal breast samples and placental DNA were used as a negative control for methylation (0% average methylation), and a commercial methylated DNA (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA) was used as positive control (98% average methylation).
Statistical analysis
The CEBPd CpG island methylation status and presence of metastatic profile were assessed for associations using the kh2-test, with Yates correction or Fisher exact test when appropriate. All the comparisons are two-tailed.

Results
Site-specific CpG methylation correlates with silencing of CEBPd in breast cancer cell lines
We analysed expression and epigenetic regulation of CEBPd in a panel of breast carcinoma cell lines. Because a previous report has identified methylation-associated downregulation of CEBPd in the SUM-52PE breast carcinoma cell line (Tang et al, 2006), we were interested to further test and characterise the relationship between expression of CEBPd mRNA and methylation in breast carcinoma cell lines. We wished to use a fully quantitative analytical technique rather than methylation-specific PCR (MSP) and we therefore used pyrosequencing to analyse a section of the CEBPd CpG island (Figure 1). In breast cancer cell lines, methylation was predominantly but not exclusively seen at CG 5 in the fragment analysed by pyrosequencing (Figure 1). CCAAT/enhancer binding protein delta mRNA was detectable in many cell lines. Expression was highest in HCC1937 and ZR75.1, but was downregulated relative to normal breast cells in several cell lines (Figure 1). There was a good correlation between methylation at CG 5 of the analysed fragment and downregulation of the mRNA expression (Figure 1).
CEBPd is downregulated in primary breast carcinomas compared with normal breast tissue
Next we sought to investigate whether there is downregulation of CEBPd mRNA in clinical cases of breast cancer, and we performed qPCR in 26 primary breast carcinomas. CCAAT/enhancer binding protein delta mRNA was reduced relative to normal breast tissue in many cases (Figure 2A). Expression was reduced most strikingly in the series of primary cancers, which later relapsed in comparison to cases which did not relapse: downregulation by at least 50% compared with normal breast epithelium was observed in 1 out of 7 non-relapsing cases and 11 out of 19 relapsing cases (compare upper and lower panels in Figure 2A).
Downregulation of CEBPd in metastatic breast cancer lesions
We then analysed expression of CEBPd in metastatic breast cancer lesions. We examined a series of 14 cases comprising the primary breast carcinoma together with the paired metastasis, which had been confirmed by histopathology. Clinico-pathological details and sites of metastasis for each pair are shown in Table 2. Using qPCR, we analysed expression of CEBPd. In 7 out of 14 (50%) cases, we observed a significant reduction in CEBPd mRNA in the metastasis relative to the primary cancer, consistent with selective pressure for loss of CEBPd expression with acquisition of a metastatic phenotype in breast cancer (Figure 2B).
CEBPd CpG island methylation predicts breast cancer relapse
We next analysed a series of 107 cases of primary breast cancer from the same patient population to determine whether analysis of CpG island methylation in CEBPd has utility as a biomarker predictive of clinical relapse. Clinico-pathological details of the study population are shown in Table 1. Representative analyses showing the distribution of methylation in the amplified area of the CpG island are shown in Figure 3. Consistent with breast carcinoma cell lines, methylation at individual CG dinucleotides was variable. In the clinical cases, methylation was most dense in CG 4-7 in the analysed fragment (Figure 3A), CGs 2 and 3 being almost entirely unmethylated in all cases. Methylation correlated well with reduced expression of CEBPd mRNA (Figure 3B). The distribution of CEBPd CpG island methylation between cases relapsing with metastatic disease and non-relapsing cases is shown in Figure 4. At the time of censor, 29% (31 of 107) of cases had relapsed. By using a mean percentage CpG methylation cutoff of 8%, as determined by pyrosequencing, relapse was significantly more frequent in cases in which the CEBPd CpG island was positive for methylation (P=0.0006 by Fisher's Exact test; P=0.001 with Yates correction).
CEBPd CpG island methylation is associated with metastatic breast cancer
We had previously shown that expression of CEBPd is downregulated in metastatic breast cancer lesions (Figure 2B). We wished to test whether CEBPd CpG island methylation is associated with increased risk of distant organ metastasis in breast cancer and we asked whether there was an association between CEBPd CpG island methylation and metastasis at specific organ sites. Metastases in liver (P=0.01), lymph node (P=0.02) and skin (P=0.02) were more common in cases in which the primary cancer was positive for methylation (using a mean percentage CpG methylation cutoff of 8% as determined by pyrosequencing). In contrast, metastases in bone and lung were not significantly affected by the methylation status of the CEBPd CpG island (P=0.13 and P=0.24, respectively). The frequency of brain metastases was higher in cases in which the primary cancer was positive for CEBPd CpG island methylation, but this just failed to reach significance (P=0.06) due to the small number of cases with brain metastases. To extend these observations, we analysed CEBPd CpG island methylation by pyrosequencing in a series of 21 CNS metastases, confirmed by histopathology to be derived from primary breast carcinomas (Figure 5). As observed previously, methylation was most dense at CG 4 and CG 5 and was detected in 81% (17 out of 21) of cases (Figure 5). For three of the cases, the paired breast cancer primary was also available to us. In one of the three cases, there was a change in methylation in the CNS metastasis in comparison with the primary, with acquisition of methylation at CGs 4, 5 and 6 in the metastasis (Figure 5).

Discussion
We have investigated the expression and regulation of CEBPd in breast cancer. We show that the gene is a frequent target for downregulation in primary breast carcinomas, as a result of methylation in the CpG island. Furthermore, we demonstrate that methylation in CEBPd is associated with metastasis and that methylation, when analysed with high-resolution, quantitative methodology may have utility as a biomarker predictive of future metastatic relapse. We were initially interested to investigate this gene because there is experimental evidence that CEBPd has tumour suppressor properties (Porter et al, 2001; Kuramoto et al, 2002) and yet, at least in some animal models, may be involved in metastasis (Balamurugan et al, 2010). The data we present are consistent with and supportive of a tumour suppressor and metastasis suppressor function in human breast cancer.
We initially studied expression in a panel of established breast carcinoma cell lines and demonstrated that expression was reduced in several of the cell lines. Some studies of candidate epigenetically regulated biomarker genes use non-quantitative, low-resolution techniques such as methylation-dependent PCR (MSP) to analyse methylation. Here we have used pyrosequencing that allows high-resolution quantification of percentage methylation at individual CG dinucleotides within a defined section of the CpG island. We observed using pyrosequenicng that methylation at CG5 in the analysed region of the CpG island showed a good correlation with transcriptional silencing in a panel of breast cancer cell lines. Our data showing correlation between methylation and downregulation of expression in both breast cancer cell lines and primary carcinomas are supported by other studies in hepatocellular carcinoma (Ko et al, 2008).
We then extended these initial studies to investigate the possible role of downregulation of CEBPd in breast cancer metastasis. Several lines of evidence from our studies support loss of CEBPd expression as a determinant of metastasis. First, analysis of paired primary/metastatic lesions showed clear downregulation in the metastases in 50% of cases. Very few studies have specifically examined changes in expression of individual genes during metastasis in breast cancer. Our data are clearly consistent with selective pressure for loss of CEBPd during acquisition of a metastatic phenotype. Second, we have shown that the presence of methylation in the CEBPd CpG island in primary breast carcinomas is associated with an increased risk of relapse and of distant organ metastasis. Third, we show that the CEBPd CpG island is frequently methylated in CNS metastases shown to originate in primary breast carcinomas. Further we have also shown herein, albeit in limited numbers of cases, that methylation in CEBPd may be acquired during metastasis to the CNS, consistent with epigenetic evolution as cells acquire metastatic properties. Methylation of the CEBPd CpG island as an important event in breast cancer metastasis is consistent with a previous report, implicating downregulation of CEBPd (among other genes) in breast carcinoma cell lines with increased propensity for CNS metastasis (Bos et al, 2009).
Our current data in early breast cancer are consistent with CEBPd being a tumour suppressor (Gery et al, 2005; Ikezoe et al, 2005; Balamurugan et al, 2010; Pawar et al, 2010). However, our data reporting fewer metastasis when CEBPd is not methylated are at face value at odds with the in vivo data, where loss of CEBPd is associated with fewer metastasis (Balamurugan et al, 2010). Possible explanations for the difference include the fact that the study of Balamurugan et al (2010) is from an animal experimental system, whereas the present data are derived from human breast cancer samples. Furthermore, the model used was in a HER2 overexpressing background (Guy et al, 1992), while in the current series only 13% of cases were HER2 positive. In addition, only data relating to lung metastasis were reported, with no data with regard to the effect of CEBPd on involvement of other common sites for metastasis or overall metastatic tumour burden. It is known within the context of human breast cancer that HER2-positive breast cancer not only has a predilection to metastasis to the lung but also to the brain and liver (Kennecke et al, 2010). Therefore, the phenotype seen may be specific to the animal model in question. Furthermore, the underlying mechanism proposed for the effect observed in vivo was related to hypoxic HIF-1a accumulation and hypoxia adaptation. As such, these conditions may therefore be prerequisite for the effect observed and may in be part dependent on HER2 (Balamurugan et al, 2010).
It should be noted, of course, that CEBPd is not the only gene contributing to a metastatic profile. The current data show that methylation of CEBPd in the primary tumour (using a mean percentage CpG methylation cutoff of 8% as determined by pyrosequencing) is associated with metastasis in the liver, lymph node and skin, with metastases in bone and lung not being significantly influenced by the methylation status of CEBPd. Multiple additional genes must be at play and we have previously shown the importance of one such candidate CACNA2D3 in the metastatic process (Palmieri et al, 2012).
The patient population analysed in our study consisted predominantly of ER-positive cases treated with adjuvant endocrine therapy. A key question in the management of early breast cancer continues to be risk stratification to identify patients likely to relapse despite being deemed to be at low risk by clinico-pathological parameters such as those in the St Gallen criteria. Such patients could then be offered appropriate systemic therapy such as adjuvant chemotherapy. While others could be spared such treatment if their risk could objectively be determined to be low. We have shown herein that methylation in the CEBPd CpG island correlates with a significantly increased risk of metastatic relapse at distant organ sites including brain and liver. Our data imply that CEBPd may have utility as a biomarker predictive of relapse and metastasis and thus in the identification of patients who may derive greater benefit from adjuvant treatment.
In conclusion, we show that transcriptional silencing of CEBPd is associated with metastasis in breast cancer. Validation of these results in larger, independent cohorts of patients is required and if positive would encourage the inclusion of CEBPd in molecular risk assessment algorithms to inform the use of adjuvant therapy in breast cancer.
