[Abstract, Introduction, Methods, Results, Discussion]

SOCS2 is dispensable for BCR/ABL1-induced chronic myeloid leukemia-like
disease and for normal hematopoietic stem cell function. Suppressor of cytokine signaling 2 (SOCS2) is known as a feedback inhibitor of cytokine signaling and is highly expressed in primary bone marrow (BM) cells from patients with chronic myeloid leukemia (CML). However, it has not been established whether SOCS2 is involved in CML, caused by the BCR/ABL1 fusion gene, or important for normal hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) function. In this study, we demonstrate that although Socs2 was found to be preferentially expressed in long-term HSCs, Socs2-deficient HSCs were indistinguishable from wild-type HSCs when challenged in competitive BM transplantation experiments. Furthermore, by using a retroviral BCR/ABL1-induced mouse model of CML, we demonstrate that SOCS2 is dispensable for the induction and propagation of the disease, suggesting that the SOCS2-mediated feedback regulation of the JAK/STAT pathway is deficient in BCR/ABL1-induced CML.

Introduction
Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) arises from hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) that have
acquired a reciprocal t(9;22) translocation, creating the BCR/ABL1 fusion
gene. The P210 BCR/ABL1 fusion protein has been described to initiate signaling
through several downstream pathways such as STAT5, PI3K, AKT, RAS and WNT.1 However, only a few downstream mediators have so far been
thoroughly studied in vivo in the context of BCR/ABL1-mediated induction of
CML, using mice deficient for the specific genes. Such studies have demonstrated that
interleukin 3 (Il3), granulocyte macrophage colony stimulating factor
(Csf2) and Cbl are dispensable for a BCR/ABL1-induced
CML-like disorder.2, 3 In contrast, Alox5 was reported to be a critical regulator
of leukemic stem cells in BCR/ABL1-induced CML.4, 5 Moreover, cells deficient for both
Stat5a and Stat5b lack the capacity to develop disease and
JAK/STAT signaling has emerged as a pivotal pathway by which BCR/ABL1 elicits its
transforming effects.6, 7, 8, 9
The STAT5-induced suppressor of cytokine signaling 2 (SOCS2), a known feedback inhibitor
of the JAK/STAT pathway, has previously been found upregulated in the advanced stages
of CML and to become downregulated following imatinib treatment in both CML cell lines and
primary cells.10, 11,
12, 13, 14, 15 In addition,
SOCS2 was recently identified as one of the core genes in gene expression
signatures shared between normal HSC and acute myeloid leukemia leukemic stem cells, with
both signatures being associated with worse clinical outcome in acute myeloid
leukemia.16 Collectively, these findings
suggest that SOCS2 may be important for both normal HSC function and
BCR/ABL1-induced leukemia. SOCS2 is one of eight members
(CIS and SOCS1-7) of the SOCS gene family which all
have both SH2 and SOCS box domains in common.17
This family of proteins is normally expressed upon stimulation with various cytokines and
has mainly been characterized as feedback inhibitors of cytokine-induced
signaling.18, 19,
20 However, their function is more complex, as
activating properties also have been suggested for SOCS2.21, 22, 23,
24 SOCS2 is present in several tissues and
involved in the regulation of several cytokines such as GH, IGF1, IL2, IL3 and EPO, with
both inhibitory and enhancing properties through other SOCS proteins and receptor-JAK
complexes.23, 24,
25 The most striking feature of
Socs2-deficient mice is gigantism caused by an STAT5B-dependent increase of
sensitivity to GH signaling.26, 27 However, the steady-state hematopoiesis of
Socs2-deficient mice appears normal.26
In this study, we found that although Socs2 was preferentially expressed in the
long-term HSC (LT-HSC) population, it was dispensable for normal HSC function as
determined by competitive stem cell transplantation. To clarify the role of SOCS2
upregulation in CML, we evaluated BCR/ABL1-induced CML-like disease from
Socs2-/- versus
Socs2+/+ primitive bone marrow (BM) cells. Both groups
developed indistinguishable CML-like disorders with similar survival curves, spleen
weights, white blood cell counts and levels of STAT5 phosphorylation. Collectively, our
data demonstrate that SOCS2 is dispensable for normal HSC function and for
BCR/ABL1-mediated induction of CML.

Materials and methods
Mice and genotyping
All animal experiments were approved by the local ethics committee in Lund, Sweden.
Generation of the Socs2-/- mice in C57BL/6
background has been described previously.26
The primers used for genotyping were
5'-CGAGCTCAGTCAAACAGGTAGG-3' and
5'-GCTTTCAGATGTAGGGTGCTTTCC-3' to detect
Socs2, and 5'-GCAGACGATGGTGCAGGATATCC-3' and
5'-GGATCGACAGATTTGATCCAGC-3' to detect the
b-galactosidase gene replacing Socs2.28 B6SJL mice and F1 crossings of C57BL/6xB6SJL were used as
recipients and for competitor/support cells in the transplantations.
Analysis of Socs2 expression from global gene expression data
To study the gene expression pattern of Socs2 in various sub-populations of
normal mouse hematopoietic cells, the raw CEL files for the data set GSE14833 were
downloaded from gene expression omnibus (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/). Gene expression values were normalized
using GCRMA.29 The mean expression value for
the probe sets 1449109_at and 1418507_s_at was used to determine Socs2
expression.
Flow cytometry analysis and sorting
Fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) analysis was performed with either FACS
Canto II or FACS Aria (Becton Dickinson, Franklin Lakes, NJ, USA). All cells sorted for
HSC analysis were freshly extracted from Socs2+/+ or
Socs2-/- mice and stained with several antibodies,
to identify various sub-populations. The stem cell population used for expression
analysis of Socs2 was defined as lineage negative for B220, CD3, Mac1, Gr-1,
Ter.119 and, in addition,
IL7Ra-c-kit+Sca1+CD34-flt3-.
The common myeloid progenitors were defined as
c-kit+Sca-1-CD34+CD16/32mid.
The HSCs used for transplantation were sorted as above but with the additional SLAM
markers CD150+CD48-. Antibodies used were purchased
either from Biolegend (San Diego, CA, USA) or eBioscience (San Diego, CA, USA).
For multicolor analysis of lineage distribution, we used antibodies against CD19 and
CD4 (eBioscience); TER.119, CD8a, CD11b, CD45.1 and CD45.2 (Biolegend); CD45R/B220,
Ly-6G/Ly-6C and Gr-1 (Becton Dickinson).
HSC transplantation
B6SJL recipient mice were lethally irradiated (900 cGy) 18 h before
transplantation and Ciprofloxacin was supplemented with the drinking water following
transplantation. BM cells were harvested and pooled from five age and sex matched
Socs2-/- and
Socs2+/+ donors, respectively. For each recipient,
200
lineage-Sca-1+c-kit+CD34-flt3-CD150+CD48-
cells (LT-HSC) were sorted and injected intravenously together with 300 000
C57BL/6xB6SJL competitor cells. Repopulation was calculated as (proportion
CD45.2+ cells)/(proportion CD45.2+
cells+proportion CD45.1.2+ cells). Lineage distribution was
analyzed within the donor population, determined by CD45.2 expression. Approximately 3
x 106 BM cells from each primary recipient were transplanted into two
lethally irradiated secondary recipients.
P210 transduction and transplantation model
The retroviral construct MSCV-BCR/ABL1-IRES-GFP was kindly
provided by Prof. Connie Eaves together with a control vector expressing only GFP
(MIG).30 Ecotropic viral particles were
produced by transient transfection into 293T cells. The transductions and
transplantation experiments were performed essentially as described by Li et
al.31 In brief, matched
Socs2+/+ and
Socs2-/- donors were killed and
c-kit+ cells were isolated using midi MACS and anti-CD117 micro beads
(Miltenyi Biotech, Bergisch Gladbach, Germany). A total of 400 000 cells per
recipient were prestimulated in StemSpan serum-free expansion medium (Stemcell
Technologies, Grenoble, France) supplemented with 50 ng/ml murine SCF,
10 ng/ml murine IL-3, 50 ng/ml human IL-6 (Peprotech, Rocky Hill,
NJ, USA), for 48 h. Transductions were performed by preloading viral particles
using Retronectin (Takara bio Inc., Otsu, Japan). Cells for transplantation were
harvested ~18 h after transduction, washed, and injected in bulk via the tail
vein along with 100 000 freshly isolated supporting cells from whole BM. The
transduction efficiency obtained was between 10 and 15% of the transplanted
cells, as determined by FACS analysis of GFP on in-vitro cultured cells, 2 days
after the transduction. Recipient mice were irradiated as described above and
transplanted mice received Ciprofloxacin with the drinking water throughout
experiment.
Blood analysis and histopathology
Untreated mice were bled from tail veins to determine steady-state blood cell counts in
Socs2-/- mice, and mice transplanted with
transduced cells were bled around 15 days after transplantation. Blood cell counts were
analyzed on ABX Micros 60 (Horiba ABX, Montpellier, France). Femur and spleen from
diseased mice were conserved in 4% formaldehyde, paraffin embedded and sectioned
before staining with hematoxylin and eosin as previously described.32
Taqman PCR and western blot
Whole BM cells were extracted from transplanted mice after euthanasia and the BM cells
were viably frozen. Freshly isolated HSCs and common myeloid progenitors were sorted as
described above and cryopreserved, viable and GFP-expressing cells were sorted from
diseased mice (from MIG control mice all myeloid cells were sorted due to lack of GFP
expression). RNA was extracted from the sorted cells using the RNeasy micro kit (Qiagen,
Hilden, Germany). Gene expression was analyzed by real-time quantitative
reverse-transcriptase PCR (RT-QPCR) using predesigned TaqMan probes for all known
members of the Socs gene family and murine Actb or Gapdh as
endogenous controls (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). RT-QPCR was performed on
an ABI Prism 7500 analyzer (Applied Biosystems) and ddCT values were calculated as
described.33 Western blot analysis to
detect STAT5A/B proteins and STAT5 tyrosine phosphorylation was performed as
described, using 150 000 sorted
PI-GFP+Mac1+ cells.32 The membrane was stripped after P-STAT5 detection and
relabeled to detect the STAT5 protein.
Intracellular flow cytometric analysis
Cells were harvested 48 h after a P210 transduction was made, as described
above. Fc receptors were blocked with unlabeled CD16/CD32 antibodies (Becton
Dickinson). Fixation and permeabilization of cells were performed using the
Cytofix/cytoperm kit (Becton Dickinson) and the cells were stained with antibodies
detecting phosphorylation of STAT5 or STAT3 (Becton Dickinson).

Results
Socs2 expression is high in HSCs
To study the role of SOCS2 in normal hematopoiesis, we first investigated the gene
expression pattern of Socs2 in various hematopoietic lineages using public gene
expression data. Interestingly, Socs2 was found highly expressed in normal
LT-HSC relative to other hematopoietic lineages (Figure 1a).
Validations using RT-QPCR showed that the Socs2 expression was about 30 times
higher in HSCs compared with Lin- cells and common myeloid progenitors
(Figure 1b), implying that SOCS2 may have a role in HSC
function.
Socs2-deficient mice display normal HSC function
In accordance with previous findings demonstrating that mice lacking Socs2
have normal steady-state hematopoiesis,26 the
Socs2-deficient mice had normal peripheral blood cell counts. Although
steady-state hematopoiesis was unaffected in Socs2-deficient mice, it could
still be envisioned that SOCS2, due to its role in cytokine signaling, could have an
important role in regulating HSC function under conditions when the hematopoietic system
is stressed. Thus, to investigate whether loss of SOCS2 affects the function of HSCs, we
performed competitive BM transplantations, in which Socs2-deficient BM cells
were challenged with wild-type competitor cells. At steady state, no significant
difference in stem cell frequency as determined by
LSKCD150+CD48- or
LSKCD34-flt3- was found between
Socs2-/- and
Socs2+/+ BM cells (Figure
2a). Furthermore, we observed no difference in repopulation between
Socs2+/+ and
Socs2-/- cells in either primary or
secondary recipients, suggesting that SOCS2, also under conditions of hematopoietic
stress, is dispensable for both short- and long-term HSC function (Figures 2b and c; Supplementary Figure
1).
SOCS2 is dispensable for BCR/ABL1-induced CML-like disease in mice
As a regulator of JAK/STAT mediated signaling, SOCS2 has been suggested to have a
role in both BCR/ABL1 and JAK2 V617F-mediated myeloid leukemogenesis.11, 13, 34 The findings that loss of SOCS2 did not have any dramatic
effects on steady-state hematopoiesis or HSC function, allowed us to examine the role of
BCR/ABL1-mediated CML-like disease in Socs2-/- cells
without confounding factors attributed to effects of Socs2 deficiency on normal
HSC function. By using the BCR/ABL1 retroviral transduction and
transplantation model previously described,31
c-kit+ BM cells were transduced and transplanted into lethally
irradiated mice, to examine disease progression in vivo. About 3 weeks after
transplantation, most mice receiving BCR/ABL1-expressing cells developed
CML-like symptoms similar to previous reports,4,
31 and had to be euthanized shortly thereafter
(Figure 3a). No difference in disease latency between mice
receiving either Socs2+/+ or
Socs2-/- cells was observed. Furthermore, when
peripheral blood was analyzed 14-16 days after transplantation, both
Socs2+/+ and
Socs2-/- mice had elevated white blood cell and
platelet counts compared with controls (Figure 3b and data
not shown). When euthanized due to disease symptoms, mice from both groups suffered from
severe splenomegaly (Figure 3c) and FACS analysis showed
that most had an expansion of myeloid GFP+ cells in the BM (Figure 3d). To further address whether the
Socs2+/+ and Socs2-/-
cells caused different leukemic phenotypes, histopathologic examinations were performed
on femurs and spleens from diseased mice. In the BM, BCR/ABL1 caused
similar phenotypes in Socs2+/+ and
Socs2-/- mice with foci of histocytes, enlarged
sinusoids, and reduced erythropoiesis compared with the MIG control (Figure 4a and data not shown). All mice with disease had markedly enlarged
spleens with infiltration of granulocytes in various maturation stages (Figure 4b and data not shown). In a number of enlarged spleens, we
also found focal regions with blasts in both Socs2+/+
and Socs-/- transplanted recipients (data not
shown). In summary, the histopathological features were clearly pathologic but recipient
mice, transplanted with BCR/ABL1 transduced
Socs2+/+ or
Socs2-/- cells, were similar.
Expression analysis of all Socs family members does not suggest compensatory
expression of other Socs genes
In BCRABL1-expressing cells from diseased mice, the Socs2 expression
was determined to be about 10-fold increased (Figure 5a).
Since different SOCS proteins can interact in both enhancing and inhibitory ways and in
part have overlapping functions, it is possible that compensatory upregulation of other
Socs genes might compensate for the loss of SOCS2 in BCR/ABL1 transformed
cells.21, 35 To test this hypothesis, we sorted GFP+ cells from
diseased mice transplanted with Socs2+/+ or
Socs2-/- cells, as well as fresh common myeloid
progenitors from Socs2+/+ and
Socs2-/- mice, and measured the expression of individual
members of the Socs gene family. In this analysis, no increase in gene
expression was observed throughout the Socs gene family in
Socs2-deficient cells (Figure 5b; Supplementary Figure 2), suggesting that other SOCS family
members do not compensate for the lack of SOCS2. SOCS2 is known to act as a feedback
inhibitor of STAT5 signaling, suggesting that a BCR/ABL1-expressing cell
with functional SOCS2 should have lower STAT5 phosphorylation compared with
Socs2-/- cells. However, similar levels of STAT5
phosphorylation were detected in both Socs2+/+ and
Socs2-/- cells from leukemic mice, indicating that
the effect of BCR/ABL1 bypasses SOCS2-mediated feedback inhibition of STAT5 (Figure 5c). Because also STAT3 has been suggested to be
phosphorylated by BCR/ABL1,36 we measured
STAT3 and STAT5 phosphorylation in BCR/ABL1 transduced
Socs2+/+ and
Socs2-/- cells by intracellular FACS.
Both the Socs2+/+ and
Socs2-/- cells had equally increased
STAT5 phosphorylation compared with MIG control, while no increase in STAT3
phosphorylation was observed (Supplementary Figure
3).

Discussion
As a modulator of the JAK/STAT signaling pathway, a pathway with a demonstrated role
in CML, the strong upregulation of SOCS2 in CML has raised the question whether
SOCS2 is involved in BCR/ABL1-induced transformation or whether it is part of
an inadequate feedback loop.6, 11, 12, 13,
14, 15 SOCS2 has
been suggested to have a role as feedback inhibitor in certain types of cancers, but its
role may be more complex, as it is variably reported as having both enhancing and
inhibitory functions in normal cytokine-induced signaling.21, 22, 23,
24, 37 As we
observed a strong upregulation of Socs2 in mouse LT-HSC, in accordance with
recent findings in human candidate HSC,16 we
first explored the role of SOCS2 in normal HSCs using competitive BM transplantation
experiments. Although it could be speculated that high expression of Socs2 in
LT-HSCs would serve as a brake, keeping this cell population quiescent due to
insensitivity to stimulating growth factors, Socs2-/-
HSCs showed equal repopulation properties both short-term and long-term, as wild-type
HSCs. Although we cannot fully exclude that Socs2 deficiency may have a subtle
effect on HSCs, our findings strongly suggest that Socs2 is not critical for
normal HSC function.
To evaluate the potential role of SOCS2 in CML, we used the previously established
retroviral BCR/ABL1 transduction and transplantation model,31 comparing disease manifestation derived from
Socs2+/+ versus
Socs2-/- cells. Mice transplanted with either donor
types showed similar disease onset, displayed similar symptoms such as elevated white
blood cell counts, splenomegaly and expansion of myeloid cells, and had similar survival
curves. These findings demonstrate that SOCS2 is not crucial for disease initiation and
propagation in this model of CML. However, the rapid disease course and the short survival
times clearly pose a potential problem as weak phenotypes may be overlooked. In an attempt
to investigate if a disease model with longer disease latency could be established, we
also transduced and transplanted fewer cells. However, transplantation of fewer
MIG-BCR/ABL1 transduced cells resulted in similar disease latency, but with
a reduced penetrance with only a few recipients developing a CML-like disease (data not
shown). Thus, using this well-established model of murine CML-like disease, it is
difficult to entirely exclude subtle effects of SOCS2 in the initiation and progression of
CML.
It is also well possible that functional redundancy could exist between different members
of the Socs gene family, which could explain the lack of phenotype in this model.
However, examining the expression levels of other Socs family members in
Socs2-deficient cells, we did not find any compensatory upregulation of the
other Socs family members. This indicates that functional redundancy involving
other Socs family members is an unlikely cause of the unaltered disease course in
mice receiving BCR/ABL1-transduced
Socs2-/- BM cells. However, both CISH and
SOCS3 have previously been reported to be upregulated in CML
patients.13 Thus, future studies combining
silencing of additional Socs members will be needed to ultimately clarify this
issue.
BCR/ABL1 is well known to activate several downstream signaling mediators such as
STAT5.6, 38
The transcription of Socs2 is normally induced by STAT5 activation, and the SOCS2
protein typically acts as a feedback inhibitor upstream of STAT5 by targeting the
interaction between JAK and cell surface receptors such as the GH receptor.10, 27, 34, 39 In this study, we demonstrate
that SOCS2 is dispensable for BCR/ABL1-mediated induction of CML, despite
Socs2 being highly upregulated by BCR/ABL1. Our finding that cells
expressing BCR/ABL1 have equal STAT5 phosphorylation independently of
Socs2 deficiency supports a hypothesis that SOCS2 fails to act as a feedback
inhibitor of the JAK2/STAT5 pathway in the context of BCR/ABL1 signaling. Because
BCR/ABL1 has been shown to activate both JAK2 and STAT5 directly,8, 9, 36 it seems reasonable that the upstream inhibition of this pathway
provided by SOCS2 would have minimal effects on BCR/ABL1-induced signaling, which is
consistent with our results.
In conclusion, we have demonstrated that SOCS2 is dispensable for both normal HSC
function and CML-like disease. These findings support the hypothesis that Socs2
upregulation by BCR/ABL1 is caused by an inadequate or non-functional feedback loop
induced by BCR/ABL1.
