[Abstract, Methods, Mixed]

Resurrection of endogenous retroviruses in antibody-deficient mice. The mammalian host has developed a long-standing symbiotic relationship with a considerable number of microbial species. These include the microbiota on environmental surfaces, such as the respiratory and gastrointestinal tracks1, and also endogenous retroviruses (ERVs), comprising a substantial fraction of the mammalian genome2,3. The long-term consequences for the host of interaction with these microbial species can range from mutualism to parasitism and are not always completely understood. The potential impact of one microbial symbiont on another is even less clear. We have studied the control of ERVs in the commonly-used C57BL/6 (B6) mouse strain, which lacks endogenous murine leukaemia viruses (MLVs) able to replicate in murine cells. We demonstrate the spontaneous emergence of fully infectious ecotropic4 MLV (eMLV) in B6 mice with a range of distinct immune deficiencies affecting antibody production. These recombinant retroviruses establish infection of immunodeficient mouse colonies, and ultimately result in retrovirus-induced lymphomas. Notably, ERV activation in immune-deficient mice is prevented in husbandry conditions associated with reduced or absent intestinal microbiota. Our results shed light onto a previously unappreciated role for immunity in the control of ERVs and provide a potential mechanistic link between immune activation by microbial triggers and a range of pathologies associated with ERVs, including cancer.

Methods
Mice
Inbred C57BL/6J (B6) and B6-backcrossed Rag1-deficient B6.129S7-Rag1tm1Mom (Rag1-/-) mice31, T cell receptor (TCR) a-deficient B6.129P2-Tcratm1Mjo (Tcra-/-) mice32, TCR d-deficient B6.129S7-Tcrdtm1Mom (Tcrd-/-) mice33, MHC class II-deficient mice B6.129S2-H2dlAb1-Ea (H2-A,E-/-) mice34, B cell-deficient, Ig heavy constant chain m-targeted B6.129S2-Ighmtm1Cgn (Ighm-/-) mice35, hen-egg lysozyme (HEL)-specific B cell receptor-transgenic (Ighm-/- MD4) mice36, MyD88-deficient B6.129P2-Myd88tm1Aki (Myd88-/-) mice37, toll-interleukin 1 receptor (TIR) domain-containing adaptor protein (TIRAP)-deficient B6.129P2-Tiraptm1Aki (Tirap-/-) mice38, and toll-like receptor adaptor molecule 1 (TICAM-1)-deficient B6.129P2-Ticam1tm1Aki (Ticam1-/-) mice39 have been described. B6-congenic mice lacking Emv2 (Emv2-/-) were generated by 12 nuclear generations onto the B6 genetic background of the respective site on chromosome 8 from the A/J strain, which lacks the Emv2 integration, and have been previously described40. Emv2-/- mice were subsequently crossed with B6-backcrossed Rag1-/- mice to create Rag1-/-Emv2-/- mice. These strains were maintained in individually ventilated cages (IVCs) in specific pathogen-free (SPF) facilities at NIMR, and kept on UV-irradiated and filtered neutral pH water. In addition, separate colonies of Rag1-/- mice, Ighm-/- mice, Myd88-/- mice, Tirap-/- mice and Tcam1-/- mice were maintained in the same facilities and constantly kept on a diet of acidified water (pH 2.5).
B6 and B6-backcrossed B6.129S7-Rag1tm1Mom/J (Rag1-/-) mice, B6.129S2-Ighmtm1Cgn/J (Ighm-/-) mice, B6.129S1-Tlr7tm1Flv/J (Tlr7-/-) mice41, and B6.129P2-Myd88tm1.1Defr/J (Myd88-/-) mice42 were also maintained in SPF facilities at The Jackson Laboratory, MA, USA (JAX), and were kept on acidified water (pH 2.8-3.2).
B6 and B6-backcrossed B6.129S7-Rag1tm1Mom (Rag1-/-) were also maintained in germ-free (GF) facilities at the Unit for Laboratory Animal Medicine, University of Michigan, MI, USA (UMICH) and kept on autoclaved distilled water.
B6 and B6-backcrossed B6.129S1-Tlr7tm1Flv (Tlr7-/-) mice, and B6.129P2-Tlr9tm1Aki (Tlr9-/-) mice43 were also maintained in SPF facilities at the Centre d'Immunologie de Marseille-Luminy, Marseille, France (CIML) and kept on autoclaved water.
B6-backcrossed TLR7-deficient B6.129P2-Tlr7tm1Aki (Tlr7-/-) mice44 were also maintained in SPF facilities at the London Research Institute (LRI), Cancer Research UK and kept on autoclaved water. These mice were received into the NIMR quarantine facility and bred before testing.
B6 and B6-backcrossed B6.129S7-Rag1tm1Mom (Rag1-/-) mice, B cell-deficient, Ig heavy chain joining region-targeted B6.129S7-Igh-Jtm1Dhu (Igh-j-/-) mice45, IgA-deficient, Ig heavy constant a chain-targeted B6.129S7-Ighatm1Grh (Igha-/-) mice46, and polymeric Ig receptor-deficient B6.129P2-Pigrtm1Rast (Pigr-/-) mice47 were maintained in IVC cages in SPF facilities at Rodent Center HCI, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland (RCHCI) and kept on autoclaved water.
C57BL/6NCrl-backcrossed B6.129S2-Ighmtm1Cgn (Ighm-/-) and activation-induced cytidine deaminase-deficient B6.CBA-Aicdatm1Hon (Aicda-/-) mice48, were also maintained in SPF facilities at the Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, Frederick, MD, USA (NCI) and kept on autoclaved water.
All colonies of Rag1-/- mice tested in this study (NIMR, JAX, UMICH and RCHCI) were established by rederivation of a common JAX stock into each of these facilities. This process ensures the removal of adventitious agents, including infectious eMLVs, and leads to colonisation of the newly-rederived mice with the specific microbiota of each facility (or the lack of colonisation in the case of the germ-free facility). These independent colonies were maintained by homozygous breeding for at least 12 and up to 45 filial generations (F12-F45) prior to testing.
Colonies of Ighm-/- mice at NIMR and JAX were also established by rederivation. The Ighm-/- mouse colony at JAX was at least the F15 of homozygous breeding prior to testing. Two colonies of Ighm-/- mice, established at NIMR by two independent rederivations (as part of the unit reorganisation), were tested at different points following rederivation. The first was maintained for 16 months (F4) on a diet of neutral pH water (before switching to acidified water for F12), and the second, more recent colony was maintained on a diet of neutral pH water for only 7 months (F1-F2) prior to testing.
Colonies of Myd88-/- mice at NIMR and JAX were also established by rederivation and maintained for approximately F16 and F5 of homozygous breeding, respectively, prior to testing. Colonies of Tlr7-/- mice at LRI/NIMR, JAX and CIML were also established by rederivation and maintained for approximately F11, F5 and F9 of homozygous breeding, respectively, prior to testing.
Unless otherwise indicated (e.g. aged mice) all mice were used between 4 and 8 weeks after birth. All animal experiments were approved by ethical committees of respective Institutes, and conducted according to local guidelines and regulations.
Expression analyses
For transcriptional analysis, peritoneal exudate cells were isolated from B6 or Rag1-/- mice and were subsequently purified by cell sorting, performed on MoFlo cell sorters (Dako, Fort Collins, CO, USA), as CD11b+MHC-IIhiB220-Gr1- macrophages. RNA was isolated from the cells using TRI reagent (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, US), according to manufacturer's instructions. Purified RNA samples were checked for quality using the Agilent bioanalyzer (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA, USA). Synthesis of cDNA, probe labelling and hybridisation were performed using Affymetrix MouseGene 1.0 ST oligonucleotide arrays (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA, USA). Primary microarray data from triplicate arrays were analysed with GeneSpring GX (Agilent Technologies, Inc., Santa Clara, CA, USA) and deposited at http://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress (E-MEXP-3623).
ERV/RE transcription was quantified in various tissues by real-time quantitative reverse transcription-based PCR (qRT-PCR). Briefly, organs were removed from mice and placed in TRI reagent or RNAlater reagent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) at each animal facility. For mice bred outside NIMR, tissues were then shipped to NIMR for further processing. Total RNA was isolated with TRI reagent, precipitated with isopropanol and washed in 75% ethanol before being dissolved in water. DNase digestion and clean-up was performed with the RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) and cDNA produced with the High Capacity Reverse Transcription kit (Applied Biosystems, Carlsbad, US) with an added RNase-inhibitor (Promega Biosciences, Madison, US). A final clean-up was performed with the QIAquick PCR purification kit (Qiagen). RNase-free water (Qiagen) and later nuclease-free water (Qiagen) was used throughout the protocol. Purified cDNA was then used as template for the amplification of target gene transcripts with SYBR Green PCR Master Mix (Applied Biosystems), run on the ABI Prism SDS 7000 and 7900HT (Applied Biosystems) cyclers, with the following primers, produced by Eurofins MWG Operon (Ebersberg, Germany):
eMLV spliced env cDNA - 116 bp product. Primers previously described40.
Forward 5'-CCAGGGACCACCGACCCACCGT-3'
Reverse 5'-TAGTCGGTCCCGGTAGGCCTCG-3'
Mouse mammary tumour virus (MMTV) spliced env cDNA - 116 bp product
Forward 5'-AGAGCGGAACGGACTCACCA-3'
Reverse 5'-TCAGTGAAAGGTCGGATGAA-3'
Hprt cDNA - 92 bp product
Forward 5'-TTGTATACCTAATCATTATGCCGAG-3'
Reverse 5'-CATCTCGAGCAAGTCTTTCA-3'
Primers specific for polytropic MLV (pMLV), modified polytropic MLV (mpMLV), xenotropic MLV (xMLV), Mus musculus type D retrovirus (MusD), murine retroviruses that use tRNAGln (GLN), murine endogenous retrovirus-like (MuERV-L) and intracisternal A-type particle elements (IAP) have been previously described49-51. Data are plotted as expression of the target transcript, relative to expression of Hprt in the same sample, derived using the algorithm:
Value=2(CTvalue ofHprt-CTvalue of target)x104
A theoretical detection limit of 2 arbitrary units is also displayed as dashed horizontal lines. For eMLV expression in particular, values above 103 were considered as high and are indicated with red-filled symbols.
eMLV mRNA transcripts originating from the Emv2 locus or from potentially integrated RARV proviruses were distinguished by RT-PCR on cDNA reverse-transcribed using a reverse primer specific to the ecotropic env gene (5'-TTCTGGACCACCACACGAC-3') and amplified using unique transcript-specific forward primers in the pol region together with a common reverse primer in the same region. The 3' nucleotides of the transcript-specific forward primers correspond to position 3576 of the pol gene, which is a C in Emv2, but a required G in all sequenced RARVs. These primers (Eurofins MWG Operon) were:
Emv2 specific mRNA forward primer
Forward 5'-CCTGGGTTTGCGGAAATGGCAC-3'
RARV specific mRNA forward primer
Forward 5'-CCTGGGTTTGCGGAAATGGCGG-3'
Common reverse primer
Reverse 5'-TTTGGCGTAGCCCTGCTTCTCG-3'
Both PCRs produce a 192 bp product.
Microarray-based analyses of retroelement expression
Expression levels of ERVs and retroelements (RE) were determined in publicly-available microarray data sets, by assigning ERV- or RE-reporting probes to the correct ERV or RE family they are reporting. Individual probe sequences were obtained for mouse and human microarray platforms from the vendors' websites. Nucleotide sequence data for mouse and human REs (including elements present in ancestral species) were downloaded from RepBase Update52 (http://www.girinst.org/repbase/) (v25/11/2011) and additional human REs from dbRIP database53 (http://www.dbrip.org) (v2h). Low-copy mouse ERV sequences were obtained from the literature54,55, database searches and mining of the C57BL/6J RefSeq assembly (v37) sequence. Local BLAST libraries were produced with the NCBI C++ Toolkit (http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/) and a Python 3.2 (http://www.python.org/) script was used to run and query BLASTn ('-task blastn-short' optimised) for the obtained probe sequences. Three separate stringencies were used in the screening: 90% (>90% length, >90% nucleotide homology), 95% (>95% length, >95% nucleotide homology) and 100% (identical matching required). For microarray platforms where single transcripts are represented by multiple probes, an additional screen was imposed to ensure >75% of probes gave appropriate BLASTn hits. Under this threshold, probes were assumed to be divided across a RE-gene boundary and were excluded from further analysis. Probes were compiled from the 90% stringency analysis for human and mouse REs and from the 100% stringency analysis for low-copy C57BL/6J ERVs. These were used to produce a Python tool, REsearch, which will be described in detail elsewhere, and the code of which is available upon request, to mine RE expression from text-based microarray analysis output.
Emv2/eMLV copy number analysis
DNA copy numbers of Emv2/eMLV were determined by real-time quantitative PCR (qPCR) on DNA samples isolated from the indicated organs or tumours using the following primers (Eurofins MWG Operon):
Emv2/eMLV env DNA - 169 bp product. Primers modified from published sequences49.
Forward 5'-AGGCTGTTCCAGAGATTGTG-3'
Reverse 5'-TTCTGGACCACCACACGAC-3'
Emv2/eMLV pol DNA - 76 bp product. Primers previously described56.
Forward 5'-CACTTTGAGGGATCAGGAGCC-3'
Reverse 5'-CTTCTAGGTTTAGGGTCAACACCTGT-3'
Signals were normalised for the amount of DNA used in the reactions based on amplification of the single-copy Ifnar1 gene with the following primers:
Ifnar1 DNA - 150 bp product
Forward 5'-AAGATGTGCTGTTCCCTTCCTCTGCTCTGA-3'
Reverse 5'-ATTATTAAAAGAAAAGACGAGGCGAAGTGG-3'
Copy numbers were calculated with a DDCT method, using splenic DNA from B6 mice as control, which was assigned a value of 1 copy per haploid genome, N.
Sequencing and sequence analyses
Bacterial genera diversity was determined in faecal samples from the large intestines of mice, by high-throughput sequencing of amplicons of bacterial DNA encoding 16S ribosomal RNA, using a the Roche FLX Genome Sequencer. Samples were either collected at NIMR or at RCHCI and were subsequently transported frozen to NIMR, where DNA was isolated, using the QIAamp DNA Stool Mini Kit (Qiagen). DNA amplification, sequencing and metagenomic analysis was performed by DNAVision (Gosselies, Belgium).
The region of the pol gene carrying the inactivating mutation in Emv2 was sequenced in isolated RARVs as described below. A 708bp fragment spanning this region was amplified from genomic DNA isolated from Mus dunni cells infected with the respective RARV using the following primers (Eurofins MWG Operon):
Emv2/eMLV pol DNA - 708 bp product.
Forward 5'-ATCGGGCCTCGGCCAAGAAAG-3'
Reverse 5'-CCGGGAGAGGGAGTAAGGTGGC-3'
RARV genomes were amplified from the same DNA template in two halves using the following primers (Eurofins MWG Operon):
RARV first half - 4074 bp product.
Forward 5'-GCGCCAGTCCTCCGATAGACT-3'
Reverse 5'-CCGGGAGAGGGAGTAAGGTGGC-3'
RARV second half - 4909 bp product.
Forward 5'-ATCGGGCCTCGGCCAAGAAAG-3'
Reverse 5'-TGCAACAGCAAAAGGCTTTATTGG-3'
PCR products were purified with the QIAquick PCR purification kit (Qiagen) and subjected to sequencing at Source BioScience (Cambridge, UK).
Sequence analyses, comparisons and alignments were performed with Vector NTI v11.5 (Invitrogen). RARV contigs were aligned against B6 MLVs as previously defined54using MAFFT within UGENE software57,58. Distance plots were calculated with RDP (Recombination Detection Program) v4.16, using a 100 bp window and a 10 bp shift58. RARV phylogenetic analyses were performed with PHYLIP (Phylogeny inference package) v3.2 within UGENE software.
FACS
Cell suspensions from spleens, lymph nodes or peritoneal exudates were stained with directly-conjugated antibodies to surface markers, obtained from eBiosciences (San Diego, CA, USA), CALTAG/Invitrogen (Carlsbad, CA, USA), BD Biosciences (San Jose, CA, USA) or BioLegend (San Diego, CA, USA). MLV SU was detected using the 83A25 monoclonal antibody59 (rat IgG2a, anti-MLV SU) as the primary reagent, followed by staining with a biotinylated anti-rat IgG2a antibody (clone RG7/1.30, BD Biosciences) as the secondary reagent, and a streptavidin-phycoerythrin (PE) conjugate (BioLegend) or a streptavidin-PE Texas Red conjugate (CALTAG/Invitrogen) as the tertiary reagent. Four- and 8-color cytometry was performed on FACSCalibur (BD Biosciences) and CyAn (Dako, Fort Collins, CO) flow cytometers, respectively, and analysed with FlowJo v8.7 (Tree Star Inc., Ashland, OR, USA) or Summit v4.3 (Dako) analysis software, respectively.
Retroviral isolation and assays
For the isolation of infectious MLVs plasma samples obtained from Rag1-/- mice were incubated with Mus dunni cells transduced with the XG7 replication-defective retroviral vector, expressing green fluorescent protein (GFP) from a human cytomegalovirus (hCMV) promoter and a neomycin-resistance gene under the control of the LTR60. The presence of infectious MLVs was examined after 10-14 days of culture by testing for the presence of pseudotyped XG7 vector in culture supernatant. For this, culture supernatant of XG7-transduced Mus dunni cells that had been incubated with plasma samples was subsequently added onto untransduced Mus dunni cells, which were then assessed for GFP expression by flow cytometry 3 days later. The Fv1 tropism of infectious MLVs was determined by adding serial dilutions of culture supernatant of XG7-transduced Mus dunni cells that had been incubated with plasma samples onto B-3T3 or N-3T3 cells. Infection was quantified by GFP expression in these cells 3 days later. B-tropic and N-tropic stocks of F-MLV, obtained as culture supernatant of Mus dunni cells chronically infected with these viruses, were used as controls. Results were expressed as B:N ratios, which were the percentage of GFP+ cells in B-3T3 cultures, divided by the percentage of GFP+ cells in N-3T3 cultures.
Histology
For histological analysis, organs were collected in formalin immediately after culling of donor mice. Histological sections were prepared and stained with haematoxylin and eosin and assessed by Dr Mark Stidworthy at IZVG Pathology, Leeds, UK.
Transmission electron microscopy
Samples were immersion fixed in 2% glutaraldehyde/2% paraformaldehyde and post-fixed in 1% osmium tetroxide using 0.1 M sodium cacodylate buffer pH 7.2. Aqueous uranyl acetate was followed by dehydration through a graded ethanol series and propylene oxide. Samples were then embedded in Epon and 50nm sections mounted on pioloform coated grids and stained with ethanolic uranyl acetate followed by Reynold's lead citrate. They were viewed with a JEOL 100EX transmission electron microscope (JEOL, Tokyo, Japan) equipped with an ORIUS 1000 CCD camera (Gatan, Pleasanton, CA, USA).
Statistical analyses
Statistical comparisons were made using SigmaPlot 12.0 (Systat Software Inc., Germany). Parametric comparisons of normally-distributed values that satisfied the variance criteria were made by unpaired Student's t-tests. Pairwise comparisons of data sets that did not pass the variance test were compared with non-parametric two-tailed Mann-Whitney Rank Sum. Bacterial diversity was compared with Analysis of variance (ANOVA) tests with Bonferroni correction for multiple comparisons. Tumour incidence rates were compared by Log-Rank Survival analysis of Kaplan-Meier curves. ANOVA and statistical comparisons of microarray data were made using GeneSpring GX, with Benjamini-Hochberg false discovery rate (FDR) correction for multiple comparisons.

Supplementary Material
1
2
