[Abstract, Results, Discussion, Methods]

Downregulation of Mcl-1 through inhibition of translation contributes to benzyl isothiocyanate-induced cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in human leukemia cells. Benzyl isothiocyanate (BITC) is one of the compounds of ITCs' family that has attracted a great deal of interest because of its ability to exhibit anticancer activity. In this study, we investigated the effects of BITC on cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in human leukemia cell lines, primary leukemia cells, and nude mice Jurkat xenograft. Exposure of Jurkat cells to BITC resulted in dose- and time-dependent increase in apoptosis, caspase activation, cytochrome c release, nuclear apoptosis-inducing factor (AIF) accumulation, Bcl2-associated X protein (Bax) translocation, and myeloid cell leukemia-1 (Mcl-1) downregulation. Treatment with these cells also resulted in cell cycle arrest at the G2/M phase. The G2/M-arrested cells are more sensitive to undergoing Mcl-1 downregulation and apoptosis mediated by BITC. BITC downregulates Mcl-1 expression through inhibition of translation, rather than through a transcriptional, post-translational, or caspase-dependent mechanism. Dephosphorylation of eukaryotic initiation factor 4G could contribute to the inhibition of Mcl-1 translation mediated by BITC. Furthermore, ectopic expression of Mcl-1 substantially attenuates BITC-mediated lethality in these cells, whereas knockdown of Mcl-1 through small interfering RNA significantly enhances BITC-mediated lethality. Finally, administration of BITC markedly inhibited tumor growth and induced apoptosis in Jurkat xenograft model in association with the downregulation of Mcl-1. Taken together, these findings represent a novel mechanism by which agents targeting Mcl-1 potentiate BITC lethality in transformed and primary human leukemia cells and inhibitory activity of tumor growth of Jurkat xenograft model.

Results
BITC potently induces apoptosis in dose- and time-dependent manners
A dose-dependent study in Jurkat cells revealed a moderate increase in apoptosis 12 h after exposure to 4 mM BITC and very extensive apoptosis at concentrations of 6-8 mM (Figure 1a). Time-course analysis of cells exposed to 8 mM BITC demonstrated a significant increase in apoptosis as early as 3 h. These events became apparent after 6 h of drug exposure, and reached near-maximal levels after 12 h (Figure 1b).
Consistent with these findings, the same BITC concentrations and exposure intervals resulted in cleavage/activation of caspase-9 and -3, and degradation of poly-ADP-ribose polymerase (PARP) (Figure 1c). These events were also accompanied by the release of cytochrome c and nuclear apoptosis-inducing factor (AIF) accumulation (Figure 1c). The increased level of AIF was determined in the nucleus of cells treated with BITC in a time-dependent manner (Figure 1d).
Exposure of Jurkat cells to BITC results in the downregulation of Mcl-1 and translocation of Bax
The effects of BITC on the expression of antiapoptotic B-cell lymphoma 2 (Bcl-2) family proteins were examined in Jurkat cells. A marked dose-dependent decrease of Mcl-1 expression was noted in BITC-treated cells. Exposure of cells to 8 mM BITC for 3 h resulted in a modest decrease in levels of Mcl-1. These events became apparent after 4 h and reached maximal effect after 6 h of drug exposure (Figure 1e). Furthermore, translocation of Bax from the cytosol to mitochondria was noted in cells treated with BITC (Figure 1e). In contrast, exposure of cells to BITC did not discernibly modify the expression of Bcl-2 family proteins, including Bcl-2, B-cell lymphoma-extra large (Bcl-xL), XIAP, or Bcl-2-associated death promoter (Bad) (Figure 1f).
G2/M-arrested cells were susceptible to BITC-mediated downregulation of Mcl-1 and apoptosis
Exposure of cells to 2 mM BITC resulted in a modest increase in percentages of cells at the G2/M phase. These events became more apparent after exposure of cells to 4 mM BITC (Figure 2a). However, the population of cells at sub-G1 was observed in place of the G2/M population after exposure of cells to 8 mM BITC. Therefore, BITC induces cell cycle arrest at the G2/M phase, and culminating in apoptosis in human leukemia cells.
To explore the mechanism by which BITC induces cell cycle arrest at the G2/M phase, we determined if BITC modulates the expression of G2/M cell cycle regulatory molecules using western blotting. Exposure of cells to BITC resulted in a marked decrease in levels of phospho-Cdc2 in a dose-dependent manner (Figure 2b). In contrast, BITC had little or no effect on the expression of cyclin A, cyclin B1, and Cdc2. These results suggest the possible involvement of Cdc2 dephosphorylation in BITC-mediated G2/M cell cycle arrest.
To determine whether G2/M-arrested cells are susceptible to the BITC-induced apoptosis, we examined the effect of BITC in cells synchronized at the G2/M phase by nocodazole treatment. Treatment of G2/M-synchronized cells with 4 mM BITC resulted in a pronounced increase in the proportion of sub-G1 cell population and apoptosis (Figures 2c and d). Consistent with these findings, treatment of G2/M-synchronized cells with 4 mM BITC also resulted in a marked increase in cleavage/activation of caspase-9 and -3, degradation of PARP, release of cytochrome c, and a pronounced decrease in levels of Mcl-1 (Figure 2e). Such findings suggest that G2/M-arrested cells might be sensitive to undergoing downregulation of Mcl-1 and induction of apoptosis-mediated by BITC.
BITC-induced lethality in association with Mcl-1 downregulation in multiple leukemia cell lines and primary human leukemia cells
To determine whether BITC-mediated lethality observed in Jurkat cells also occur in other leukemia cell lines, parallel studies were carried out in U937 and HL-60 cells. Exposure of Jurkat and U937 cells to 8 mM BITC for 12 h resulted in a pronounced increase in apoptosis (Figure 3a). Also, these cells exhibited comparable degrees of caspase-9 and -3 activation, PARP degradation, cytochrome c release, and Mcl-1 downregulation (Figures 3b and c). However, HL-60 cells are more refractory to apoptosis induction by BITC than those cells, and exhibited less degrees of caspase-9 and -3 activation, cytochrome c release, and Mcl-1 downregulation.
To determine whether BITC could also trigger apoptosis in primary human leukemia cells, parallel experiments were carried out in primary leukemia blasts from eight acute myeloid leukemia (AML) patients. Exposure of these AML blasts to 8 mM BITC for 24 h resulted in a marked increase in apoptosis (Figure 3d). Consistent with these findings, treatment of leukemia blasts from two AML patients with BITC also resulted in cleavage/activation of caspase-9 and -3, degradation of PARP, release of cytochrome c, and downregulation of Mcl-1 (Figure 3e). These findings indicate that BITC induces apoptosis in association with Mcl-1 downregulation in both human leukemia cell lines and primary leukemia blasts. In contrast, BITC exerted little toxicity toward normal human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (Figure 3f). No change in expression of Mcl-1 was noted in BITC-treated cells.
Downregulation of Mcl-1 by BITC proceeds through inhibition of translation
To elucidate the mechanism underlying Mcl-1 downregulation by BITC, Mcl-1 mRNA expression in BITC-treated cells was quantified using real-time RT-PCR. Notably, treatment of cells with 8 mM BITC for different time intervals did not alter the expression of Mcl-1 at mRNA levels (Figure 4a). Furthermore, treatment with BITC had no significant effect on luciferase driven by an Mcl-1 promoter (Figure 4b). Such findings suggest that BITC induces Mcl-1 downregulation through transcription-independent mechanism.
To determine whether the downregulation of Mcl-1 mediated by BITC occurs through post-translational mechanism, Jurkat cells were exposed to 8 mM BITC for various intervals in the presence or absence of the proteasome inhibitor MG132 (10 mM). Treatment with MG132 alone did not affect the decline of Mcl-1 levels. Exposure of cells to BITC resulted in the downregulation of Mcl-1 in a time-dependent manner (Figure 4c). However, pretreatment of cells with MG132 did not block the downregulation of Mcl-1 mediated by BITC. To validate the action of MG132, we used ubiquitin as a control protein, with levels clearly increased upon proteasomal inhibition (Figure 4d). These findings suggest that downregulation of Mcl-1 mediated by BITC does not occur through post-translational mechanism.
We also determined the effect of caspase inhibition on Mcl-1 stability. Although pretreatment with caspase inhibitor Z-VAD blocked BITC-induced apoptosis and caspase-9 and -3 activation, it blocked the downregulation of Mcl-1 partly (Figures 4e and f). These findings demonstrate that Mcl-1 downregulation induced by BITC is affected by caspase inhibition, albeit not completely.
Lastly, we investigated the effect of protein synthesis inhibitor cycloheximide (CHX) on the downregulation of Mcl-1 mediated by BITC. Treatment with CHX alone reduced Mcl-1 protein level, and combined treatment with CHX and BITC decreased Mcl-1 protein level at a enhanced rate. Moreover, CHX prevented the accumulation ubiquitin proteins (Figure 5a). Such findings demonstrate that BITC-induced Mcl-1 downregulation could be caused by the inhibition of protein synthesis. To further confirm these possibilities, we pulse-labeled cells with [35S]methionine and chased with or without BITC treatment. Newly synthesized Mcl-1 was analyzed by immunoprecipitation. Mcl-1 protein in cells prelabeled with [35S]methionine was decreased at a similar rate following treatment without or with BITC, even though the total amount of Mcl-1 protein was dramatically decreased after BITC treatment, whereas no major changes were observed in protein synthesis of the housekeeping genes hsp90 and b-actin (Figure 5b). These findings indicate that BITC induces Mcl-1 downregulation through inhibition of translation.
To identify changes in the translational efficiency of individual mRNAs during BITC-induced apoptosis, we isolated ribosomal fractions from extracts of cells treated with or without BITC. By ultracentrifugation in sucrose gradients, we separated the 40S and 60S complexes, which correspond to untranslated mRNAs (U in Figure 5c) and the polysomal fractions that contains mRNAs that are being efficiently translated into proteins (P in Figure 5c). Exposure of cells to BITC resulted in a considerable decrease in the amount of polysomes and a corresponding increase in the abundance of the 40S and 60S complexes (Figure 5c), suggesting that inhibition of protein translation occurs during BITC-induced apoptosis. We then quantified by real-time RT-PCR, the transcripts corresponding to actin and Mcl-1 mRNAs in both U and P fractions and plotted the P/U ratio (Figure 5d). Actin mRNA is actively translated in untreated cells, as indicated by a P/U ratio 2, whereas a ratio of 1.5 was observed for Mcl-1 mRNA. This implies that the two mRNAs are being translated, although Mcl-1 mRNAs are present in lower amounts than actin. After BITC treatment, we observed a sharp decrease of polysome-associated Mcl-1 mRNAs (P/U<1) and a slight decrease in the levels of the cap-dependent actin mRNAs. Our results indicate that cap-dependent translation might be preferentially impaired.
To elucidate further mechanism by which BITC might inhibit Mcl-1 translation, we examined the status of the initiation complex eukaryotic initiation factor (eIF)4E and eIF4G. Treatment with BITC for 2 h resulted in a striking suppression of eIF4G phosphorylation. These events became apparent after 3 h of drug exposure. Treatment with BITC also caused a decrease in the expression of total eIF4G at late time intervals (Figure 5e). However, treating with BITC resulted in a modest increase in levels of phospho-eIF4E after 2 h of drug exposure, and then returned to the initial level after 12 h of treatment. Furthermore, phosphorylation of the eIF4E-binding protein 1 declined after BITC treatment. These observations suggest that BITC-mediated inhibition of eIF4G phosphorylation may be involved in the inhibition of Mcl-1 translation.
Enforced expression of Mcl-1 substantially attenuates BITC-mediated apoptosis
To determine whether downregulation of Mcl-1 has a functional role in BITC-induced apoptosis, Jurkat cells stably overexpressing Mcl-1 were employed. Two selected populations of cells, Mcl-1(C8) and Mcl-1(C12), displayed two- to threefold increases in Mcl-1 protein levels compared with empty vector control cells (Figure 6a). Significantly, enforced expression of Mcl-1 attenuated BITC-mediated apoptosis, activation of caspase-9 and -3, degradation of PARP, and release of cytochrome c (Figures 6a and b). Although a slight reduction in the expression of ectopic Mcl-1 was observed in infectants exposed to 8 mM BITC, as one would expect of an inhibitor of translation, the Mcl-1 levels in BITC-treated infectant cells were higher than that in untreated control cells (Figure 6c). These data indicate that downregulation of Mcl-1 has a critical role in BITC-induced apoptosis in leukemia cells.
Knockdown of Mcl-1 by RNA interference enhances BITC-mediated apoptosis
To further confirm the functional role of Mcl-1 in BITC-mediated lethality in leukemia cells, Jurkat cells stably expressing Mcl-1 siRNA were employed. The knockdown of Mcl-1 in Jurkat cells led to a nearly two- to threefold increase in BITC-mediated apoptosis compared with control cells (Figure 6d). BITC was also considerably more effective in triggering the activation of caspase-9 and -3, degradation of PARP, and release of cytochrome c (Figure 6e). Furthermore, infection of cells with Mcl-1 siRNA reduced levels of total Mcl-1 compared with control cells. Exposure of these cells to BITC resulted in a significant reduction of Mcl-1 expression compared with control cells (Figure 6f). Taken together, these findings indicate that Mcl-1 downregulation has a significant functional role in BITC-mediated lethality.
BITC exhibits antitumor activity in xenografts of leukemia Jurkat cells by induction of apoptosis and downregulation of Mcl-1
The in vivo antitumor activity of BITC on leukemia Jurkat cells was further evaluated in a nude mouse xenograt model. Treatment with BITC resulted in a dramatic suppression of tumor growth 10 days following drug exposure (P<0.05 versus vehicle control). These events became more apparent 15 and 20 days after drug exposure (P<0.01 between BITC treatment and vehicle control) (Figure 7a). In contrast, no significant change in body weight was noted comparing vehicle control and BITC regimen (Figure 7b), indicating that no severe toxicity was observed.
We further determined apoptosis in tumor tissue of leukemia xenograft using TdT-mediated dUTP-biotin nick-end labeling (TUNEL) assay. TUNEL-positive apoptotic cells of tumor sections significantly increased in BITC-treated Jurkat xenograft mice compared with the control group. Exposure of mice to BITC also caused a rapid increase in immunoreactivity for cleaved-caspase-3 in tumor sections, indicative of apoptosis. Furthermore, Mcl-1 expression in tumor sections of Jurkat xenograft mice decreased upon BITC treatment (Figure 7c). Such findings suggest that BITC-mediated antileukemic activity in vivo is associated with the downregulation of Mcl-1.

Discussion
The results of this study indicate that treatment with BITC results in G2/M cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in human leukemia cells. Notably, this study demonstrates for the first time that downregulation of Mcl-1 through inhibition of translation has an important role in BITC-mediated lethality.
Extensive evidence is accumulating that Mcl-1 expression has a critical role in the survival of transformed cells,23 particularly those of hematopoietic origin.21 The development of anticancer agents that diminish Mcl-1 protein levels has been the focus of intense interest. Indeed, a number of studies have documented Mcl-1 downregulation during apoptosis by a variety of agents, including ultraviolet (UV),24 kinase inhibitor BAY43-9006,25 growth factor withdrawal,26 among others. Evidence revealed that Mcl-1 protein levels are regulated through several different mechanisms, including those operating at the transcriptional, translational, and post-translational levels. These results reveal that BITC induces a rapid decrease in Mcl-1 protein levels. A critical question then arises regarding the mechanism by which Mcl-1 downregulation occurs during BITC treatment.
It has been shown that several cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors, including flavopiridol, roscovitine, and SU9516, downregulate Mcl-1 expression in leukemia cells through inhibition of RNA polymerase II, leading to transcriptional repression.27, 28, 29 Our data indicated that BITC failed to decrease substantially Mcl-1 mRNA levels and promoter activity. These findings argue against the possibility that BITC downregulates Mcl-1 protein through inhibition of transcription.
Another major mechanism by which Mcl-1 protein level could be regulated is degradation by the proteasome system. It has been shown that the elimination of Mcl-1 via DNA damage can be blocked by MG132, a proteasome inhibitor, suggesting a role for the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway in apoptosis.30 However, pretreatment with MG132 failed to block the downregulation of Mcl-1 mediated by BITC. Our findings argue strongly against the possibility that BITC downregulates Mcl-1 protein through the proteasome system. It should be noted that Mcl-1 can be the target of degradation of caspase-3.31 Caspase-mediated cleavage might contribute to the downregulation of Mcl-1 expression as caspases can cleave Mcl-1 following two aspartic acid residues (Asp127 and Asp157). However, the findings that BITC-induced the downregulation of Mcl-1 was not completely attenuated by caspase inhibition, raising the possibility that factors other than caspase-mediated events are involved in this phenomenon.
Having ruled out the mechanism by which BITC induced downregulation of Mcl-1 through inhibition of transcription and the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway, the major remaining possibility is that BITC could downregulate Mcl-1 protein levels through inhibition of translation. Indeed, our results indicate that a marked inhibition of Mcl-1 translation was noted following exposure of cells to BITC. Notably, treatment with BITC slightly accelerated the clearance of Mcl-1 protein after inhibition of protein synthesis by CHX. However, BITC did not enhance the elimination of pre-existing Mcl-1 protein in cells prelabeled with [35S]methionine, suggesting that inhibition of translation played a major role in BITC-induced downregulation of Mcl-1 protein levels. Generally, translation is primarily regulated by several initiation factors. The initiation complex eIF4F, a heterotrimeric protein composed of eIF4E, eIF4G, and eIF4A, has a critical role in the translation of the mRNAs. The center of the eIF4F complex is eIF4G, a modular protein and the docking platform for several translation initiation factors and regulatory proteins, including mitogen-activated protein kinase-interacting kinases 1 and 2.32 The eIF4G family consists of three isoforms, including eIF4GI, eIF4GII, and p97/DAP5/NAT1. Both eIF4GI and eIF4GII are involved in cap-dependent translation, and p97/DAP5/NAT1 could be a caspase-activated translation factor that can mediate its own cap-independent translation.33 The recent studies have indicated that phosphorylation of eIF4G at Ser1108 has been characterized as correlating with translation.34 The anabolic agents, such as insulin, increase the phosphorylation of eIF4G at Ser1108 through a mammalian target of rapamycin-dependent pathway.35 Insulin-like growth factor-1 induces regulation of cap-dependent translation through eIF4G phosphorylation, suggesting that eIF4G phosphorylation is a molecular marker associated with enhanced cap-dependent translation.36 In this context, BITC potently suppressed phosphorylation of eIF4G at Ser1108 at early time point of BITC exposure, suggesting that inhibition of eIF4G phosphorylation could be responsible for BITC-mediated downregulation of Mcl-1 through inhibition of cap-dependent translation. By using polysome analysis and quantitative real-time RT-PCR, our data also indicates that BITC downregulates Mcl-1 through inhibition of cap-dependent translation, further confirming that inhibition of cap-dependent translation through dephosphorylation of eIF4G could contribute to BITC-mediated Mcl-1 downregulation. A clearer characterization of the functional role of eIF4G dephosphorylation in the disruption of Mcl-1 translation by BITC awaits further study.
It is significant that enforced expression of Mcl-1 markedly diminished BITC-mediated lethality in Jurkat cells, arguing that downregulation of Mcl-1 has a critical role in BITC-related lethality. Consistent with this notion, Mcl-1 overexpression largely inhibited caspase activation and cytochrome c release. These findings are consistent with previous study, which demonstrated that Mcl-1 operates upstream of cytochrome c release and caspase activation in UV-treated HeLa cells.24 In addition, the knockdown of Mcl-1 in Jurkat cells led to a significant increase in BITC-mediated cytochrome c release, caspase activation, and apoptosis. Such findings are accordant with the studies that indicated that downregulation of Mcl-1 through siRNA is sufficient to induce apoptosis in multiple myeloma cells.37
Previous studies have shown that BITC markedly inhibits tumor growth of human breast and pancreatic cancer cell xenografts.7, 14 However, little is known about inhibitory effects of BITC on tumor growth of human leukemia xenograft model. In our studies using a nude mice Jurkat xenograft model, tumor volumes were reduced compared with controls after BITC treatment, indicating an antileukemia activity of this compound. To further validate the apoptotic mechanism found in vitro, we next examined the TUNEL staining, cleaved-caspase-3, and Mcl-1 expression in tumor specimens obtained from control- and BITC-treated animals. The increase in TUNEL-positive cells, caspase-3 activation, and the decrease in Mcl-1 expression were detected in the BITC-treated xenografts compared with the control group. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report that describes an effective extrapolation of the in vitro apoptosis-inducing effects of BITC on the leukemia cells to the in vivo situation.
In conclusion, these findings indicate that BITC effectively induces apoptosis in human leukemia cell lines, primary AML blasts, and leukemia xenograft. This effect occurs in association with the downregulation of Mcl-1 through inhibition of translation, leading, in turn, to Bax translocation and nuclear AIF accumulation, and culminating in cytochrome c release and caspase activation. Dephosphorylation of eIF4G could contribute to the inhibition of Mcl-1 translation mediated by BITC. This study could provide a better understanding of how BITC exerts its antileukemic activity in vivo and aid in developing this compound to treat leukemia and possibly other hematologic malignancies.

Materials and Methods
Chemicals and reagents
BITC was purchased from LKT Laboratories (St. Paul, NM, USA). Z-VAD-FMK, MG132, and CHX were from EMD Biosciences (La Jolla, CA, USA), and nocadazole was from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA). Antibodies against AIF, cytochrome c, cyclin A, cyclin B1, cdc-2, histone H1, and b-actin were purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Santa Cruz, CA, USA); Bcl-xL, XIAP, cytochrome c oxidase (COX) IV, Bad, ubiquitin, eIF4E, phospho-eIF4E (Ser209), phospho-4E-BP1 (Thr37/46), eIF4G, phospho-eIF4G (Ser1108), phospho-cdc2 (Tyr15), cleaved-caspase-3, and cleaved-caspase-9 were purchased from Cell Signaling Technology (Beverly, MA, USA); Bcl-2, Mcl-1, and Bax were purchased from BD Pharmingen (San Diego, CA, USA); Mcl-1 for immunohistochemistry was purchased from Abcam (Cambridge, MA, USA); and PARP was purchased from Epitomics (Burlingame, CA, USA).
Cell culture
Jurkat, U937, and HL-60 cells were purchased from American Type Culture Collection (ATCC, Manassas, VA, USA) and cultured in RPMI 1640 medium containing 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS).
Normal human peripheral blood mononuclear cells were obtained from blood samples collected from healthy volunteers. Peripheral blood samples were obtained from eight patients with newly diagnosed AML after informed consent. Approval was obtained from the Southwest Hospital (Chongqing, China) institutional review board for these studies. AML blasts were isolated by density gradient centrifugation over Histopaque-1077 (Sigma Diagnostics, St. Louis, MO, USA) at 400 x g for 38 min. Isolated mononuclear cells were washed and assayed for total number and viability using Trypan blue exclusion. Blasts were suspended at 8 x 105/ml and incubated in RPMI 1640 medium containing 10% FBS in 24-well plates.
Human Mcl-1 lentiviral construct was generated by inserting human full-length Mcl-1 cDNA into Ubi-MCS-3FLAG-IRES-puromycin lentiviral vector (GeneChem, Shanghai, China). The human Mcl-1 lentiviral expression plasmid or GFP-puromycin-LV vector was cotransfected into 293Ta cells with the Lenti-Pac HIV Packaging Mix (GeneChem, Shanghai, China). Lentivirus-containing supernatants were harvested 48 h after transfection. To establish stable Mcl-1-overexpressing cell lines, Jurkat cells were transduced with serial dilutions of lentiviral supernatant in the presence of 5 mg/ml polybrene and selected by 5 mg/ml puromycin. Thereafter, cells from each population of cells were analyzed for Mcl-1 expression by western blot. And two selected populations of cells, designated C8 and C12, which displayed overexpression of Mcl-1 compared with empty vector controls (Ubi-MCS-EGFP-3FLAG-2A-Puro), were used in all experiments.
Western blotting
The total cellular samples were washed two times with ice-cold PBS and lysed in 1 x NuPAGE LDS sample buffer (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA). The protein concentration was determined using Enhanced BCA Protein Assay Reagent (Beyotime, Jiangsu, China) and 30 mg of sample proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE, and transferred to PVDF membrane. Membranes were blocked with 5% fat-free dry milk in Tris-buffered saline containing 0.05% Tween-20 and incubated with antibodies. Protein bands were detected by incubating with horseradish peroxidase-conjugated antibodies (Kirkegaard and Perry Laboratories, Gaithersburg, MD, USA) and visualized with enhanced chemiluminescence reagent (Perkin-Elmer Life Sciences, Boston, MA, USA).
Apoptosis assay
Apoptotic cells were measured by staining with FITC-conjugated Annexin V/propidium iodide (PI) (BD Pharmingen, San Diego, CA, USA) and determining with flow cytometer according to the manufacturer's instructions as described previously.38 Both early apoptotic (Annexin V-positive, PI-negative) and late apoptotic (Annexin V-positive and PI-positive) cells were included in cell death determinations.
Cell cycle analysis
Cell cycle analysis was performed on the harvested cell pellets treated with 0.1% Triton X-100, 3.8 mM Na citrate in ddH2O, and PI solution (50 mg/ml) containing RNase B (7 kU/ml). The mixture was analyzed by a flow cytometer after 30 min. The cell cycle distribution was measured using the FlowJo software (Treestar, Ashland, OR, USA).
Mcl-1 pulse-chase
Jurkat cells were plated at a density of 5 x 106 cells, in methionine-free RPMI for 30 min, and then labeled with 100 mCi/ml [35S]methionine (ICN; Biomedicals Inc., Irvine, CA, USA) for 60 min at 37 degC. Cells were then washed in PBS and cultured in complete RPMI containing fetal bovine serum and excess of cold methionine (10 mM) and cysteine (5 mM) for the indicated periods in the presence or absence of 8 mM BITC. At the end of the indicated intervals, cells were collected and subsequently subjected to immunoprecipitation using Mcl-1 antibody as described above. The immunoprecipitates were subjected to SDS-PAGE followed by autoradiography.
RNA interference
Oligonucleotides with the following targeting sequences were used for the cloning of small hairpin RNA-encoding sequences in hU6-MCS-ubiquitin-EGFP-IRES-puromycin lentiviral RNAi vector: Mcl-1, 5'-GCTAAACACTTGAAGACCATA-3'. After cotransfection of lentiviral packaging plasmids into 293Ta cells, lentivirus-containing supernatants were harvested 48 h after transfection. Jurkat cells were infected with the lentiviral supernatant plus 5 mg/ml polybrene and selected by 5 mg/ml puromycin. Thereafter, cells from each clone were analyzed for Mcl-1 expression by western blot. And two selected populations of cells, designated C3 and C6, were used in all experiments.
Confocal immunofluorescence microscopy
At the end of each incubation, cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde at room temperature for 30 min, permeabilized by 0.1% Triton X-100 in PBS at room temperature for 15 min, and then blocked nonspecific binding with 3% bovine serum albumin in PBS for 30 min at room temperature. Cells were further incubated with primary polyclonal anti-AIF antibody at 4 degC overnight, followed by secondary antibody (Alexa Fluor 647 donkey anti-rabbit IgG; Invitrogen) for 1 h. After washing, the nuclei were counterstained with 0.1 mg/ml DAPI (Sigma-Aldrich Co., St. Louis, MO, USA) for 10 min, and then sealed in antifade reagent (Beyotime, Jiangsu, China). Confocal micrographs were scanned by a laser confocal scanning microscope TCS SP5; Leica Microsystems, Mannhein, Germany.
Analysis of nuclear AIF, cytosolic cytochrome c, and Bax and mitochondrial Bax
For nuclear fractionations, cells (2 x 106) were fractionated by Nuclear and Cytoplasmic Protein Extraction Kit (Beyotime) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Mitochondrial and cytosolic fractions were obtained as described previously.27 These fractions were prepared and subjected to western blot assay to monitor expression of AIF, cytochrome c, and Bax.
Polysome analysis
Sucrose gradient centrifugation was used to separate ribosomes into polysomal and subpolysomal forms. After centrifugation, gradients were collected into 10 fractions, while UV absorbance was recorded at 260 nm. The fractions corresponding to subpolysomes and polysomes were pooled. The RNA in the pooled fractions was extracted and analyzed by quantitative real-time RT-PCR.
Quantitative real-time RT-PCR
Total RNA and pooled sucrose gradient fractionated RNA were extracted using the RNeasy mini kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA). Quantitative real-time PCR analysis was carried out on an iCycler (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Munchen, Germany) using the RealMasterMix (SYBR Green) (Tiangen Biotech, Beijing, China) according to the manufacturer's instructions. mRNA levels were normalized to b-actin level. Primers used for amplification of Mcl-1 and b-actin were purchased from Invitrogen. Sequences were as follows: b-actin - 5'-GGACTTCGAGCAAGAGATGG-3' (forward), 5'-AGCACTGTGTTGG CGTACAG-3' (reverse); Mcl-1 - 5'-TAAGGACAAAACGGGACTGG-3' (forward), 5'-ACCAGCTCCTACTCCAGCAA-3' (reverse).
Reporter gene assay
Jurkat cells were cotransfected with a -203/+10-Mcl-1-pGL2 plasmid (kindly provided by Dr. PK Burnette, Moffitt Research Center, Tampa, FL, USA), in which firefly luciferase is driven by the -203 to +10 element of the Mcl-1 gene promoter, or the pGL2-basic empty vector (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) and pRL-TK-luc plasmid encoding for Renilla luciferase. Cells were incubated for 12 h and then treated with BITC for an additional 12 h, after which the activity of firefly and Renilla luciferases was measured using the Dual-Luciferase reporter assay system (Promega). Values for firefly luciferase activity were normalized to those obtained for Renilla luciferase activity.
Xenograft model and immunohistochemical evaluation
Nude mice (5 weeks old) were purchased from Vital River Laboratories (Beijing, China). Animal experiments were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) of the university. Jurkat cells (2 x 106/0.2 ml per mouse) were suspended in sterile PBS and injected subcutaneously into the right flank of the mice. Mice were randomly assigned in two groups of 10 mice per group. At 3 days after tumor inoculation, the treatment group received BITC (50 mg/kg, intraperitoneally for 20 days). The control group received an equal volume of solvent control. Tumor size and body weight were measured every 5 days. Tumor volumes were determined by a caliper and calculated according to the formula (width2 x length)/2. All animals were killed immediately after 20 days of drug exposure.
TUNEL assay
Apoptosis in tumor tissue sections was determined using In Situ Cell Death Detection kit (Roche, Mannheim, Germany). Briefly, tumor tissue sections of formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded specimens were dewaxed in xylene and rehydrated in a graded series of ethanol. The tumor samples were incubated with proteinase K (2 mg/ml), and the TUNEL staining was performed according to the manufacturer's instructions.
Statistical analysis
Densitometric analysis was performed using the Quantity One software (Bio-Rad) to determine the relative abundance of protein expression. The values were presented as means+-S.D. for at least three independent experiments. Student's t-test were used for statistical analysis. P<0.05 (*) or P<0.01 (**) was considered significantly different.
