[Abstract, Methods, Mixed]

Somatic deletions of genes regulating MSH2 protein stability cause DNA mismatch repair deficiency and drug resistance in human leukemia cells. DNA mismatch repair enzymes (e.g., MSH2) maintain genomic integrity, and their deficiency predisposes to several human cancers and to drug resistance. We found that leukemia cells from a substantial proportion of patients (~11%) with newly diagnosed acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) have low or undetectable MSH2 protein levels (MSH2-L), despite abundant wild-type MSH2 mRNA. MSH2-L leukemia cells contained partial or complete somatic deletions of 1-4 genes that regulate MSH2 degradation (FRAP1, HERC1, PRKCZ, PIK3C2B); these deletions were also found in adult ALL (16%) and sporadic colorectal cancer (13.5%). Knockdown of these genes in human leukemia cells recapitulated the MSH2 protein deficiency by enhancing MSH2-degradation, leading to significant reduction in DNA mismatch repair (MMR) and increased resistance to thiopurines. These findings reveal a previously unrecognized mechanism whereby somatic deletions of genes regulating MSH2 degradation result in undetectable levels of MSH2 protein in leukemia cells, MMR deficiency and drug resistance.

Methods
Patients with ALL (initial discovery and validation cohorts)
We initially studied 90 patients (age <= 21 years) who had newly diagnosed ALL and were enrolled on the St. Jude Total Therapy XV protocol. To validate our findings, we subsequently studied an additional 170 patients with ALL enrolled on the same treatment protocol, using publicly available SNP data we had previously reported17. The treatment and research protocol was approved by the Institutional Review Board of St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, and informed consent was obtained from patients, their guardians, or both before enrollment. Patient assent was also obtained from patients who were 14 years or older. The diagnosis of ALL was based on previously described morphological and molecular criteria. Leukemia cells were isolated by applying a Ficoll-Hypaque gradient to bone marrow aspirates obtained at diagnosis (median, 97% blast cells). Normal leukocytes were isolated from peripheral blood samples obtained after the successful completion of remission induction therapy (on days 45-48 after the start of treatment).
Affymetrix 600K SNP array analyses
To assess gene copy number loss in MSH2-L leukemia cells, DNA was extracted from leukemia cells and normal peripheral blood leukocytes (obtained when patients were in complete remission) and genotyped for 600K SNPs using the Affymetrix GeneChip Human Mapping 50K-Hind-240, 50K-Xba-240, 250K-Sty and 250K Nsp SNP arrays. DNA was restriction enzyme digested, PCR-amplified, purified, labeled, fragmented and hybridized to the arrays according to the manufacturer's instructions. SNP array data were analyzed using dChip for chromosomal abnormalities. To improve the accuracy of copy number inference using dChip, we applied a normalization procedure that uses SNPs exclusively from regions shown to be diploid in the normal leukocytes and maps signals from those SNPs to a common target probability distribution. The SNPs with an estimated copy number lower than 1.40 were considered as evidence of deletions17.
We initially performed SNP analysis on PRKCZ, because it is known to regulate MSH2 stability. This led us to subsequently perform a broader pathway analysis, to interrogate additional genes upstream of PRKCZ (Figure 1c). This included eight genes and a total of 122 SNPs. For each SNP, we evaluated the over-representation of deletions in MSH2-L leukemia cells compared to MSH-H leukemias, using Fisher's Exact test. The significance of each SNP was then adjusted for multiple testing using 100,000 permutations. At each permutation, we recorded the smallest p-value among all the 122 SNPs based on randomly assigned MSH2 status. The adjusted p-values were computed as the proportion of permutations whose smallest p-values were lower than or equal to the observed.
Cell culture
The human T-lineage leukemia cell line CCRF-CEM was obtained from the American Type Culture Collection. The human pre-B leukemia cell lines 697 and NALM-6 were obtained from the German Collection of Microorganisms and Cell Cultures. Cells were cultured in RPMI-1640 medium containing 2 mM glutamine and 10% fetal bovine serum at 37 degC with 5% CO2.
Stable Short Hairpin RNA (shRNA) knockdowns
CCRF-CEM cells were infected with MISSION lentiviral transduction particles (Sigma-Aldrich) produced from a library of sequence-verified shRNAs targeting human PIK3C2B, FRAP1/MTOR, HERC1 or PRKCZ transcripts. Non-target shRNA control particles (SHC002V) were also purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Individual cell clones were isolated in medium containing puromycin.
Statistical analyses
Fisher's exact test was used to test the overrepresentation of losses among MSH2 low patients versus MSH2 positive patients. Fisher's exact test was performed at a single SNP level. A linear regression model was used to test the correlation between the levels of MSH2 mRNA and protein. The expression levels of the probe sets were analyzed by applying a general linear model in which the effect of MSH2 status (positive vs. negative) was adjusted for the ALL genetic subtypes. Overall survival rates were compared with the stratified Mantel-Haenszel test. The Cox proportional hazards model was used to identify independent prognostic effect of MSH2 status. For patients who achieved complete remission, cumulative incidence of hematological relapse were constructed by the method of Kalbfleisch and Prentice, and compared with Gray's test. All other failures were considered competing events. Fine and Gray's model was used to identify independent prognostic factors.

Supplementary Material
1
