[Abstract, Introduction, Mixed, Mixed, Discussion]

Involvement of memory T-cells in the pathophysiology of chronic
lymphocytic leukemia. The role of T-cells in the pathogenesis of chronic lymphocytic leukemia has recently gained much attention due to the importance of the constant interaction between neoplastic B-cells with microenvironment substratum and T-cells. It is believed that these interactions modulate the clinical course of the disease, mainly through the regulation of the expansion, differentiation, and survival of chronic lymphocytic leukemia B-cells. Importantly, this crosstalk may also change the number, function, and memory phenotype of normal T-cells, thereby altering the amplitude and/or efficiency of adaptive immunity in chronic lymphocytic leukemia patients. The present study presents an overview on important aspects of this immunological crosstalk, particularly on the abnormalities of chronic lymphocytic leukemia B-cells and the alterations in normal T-cells, with focus on the CD4 memory T-cell compartment that could offer survival signals to chronic lymphocytic leukemia B-cell clone(s) and contribute to the establishment and progression of the disease. The authors believe that understanding the biological consequences of the interaction between normal T- and neoplastic B-cells in chronic lymphocytic leukemia may allow for improvements in the prognostic information and therapeutic approaches for this disease.

Introduction
Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is the most common mature B-cell neoplasm in Western
countries. It is characterized by the appearance of monoclonal
CD5+CD19+ mature B-cells in the peripheral blood, lymphoid
system, and bone marrow.1 The
prevalence of the disease is higher in men compared to women and the estimated incidence
is two to six cases per 100,000 people annually. At the time of diagnosis, approximately
31% of the patients are younger than 64 years and the average age is 72 years.1,2
The clinical course of CLL is heterogeneous, and survival can vary from months to
decades. Although most patients have an asymptomatic disease, there is a group of
patients with aggressive CLL characterized by autoimmune hemolytic anemia, recurrent
infections, immunodeficiency, and transformation to aggressive lymphoma, with an average
life expectancy of less than three years.1,3
Several factors play an important role in the etiology of CLL, such as genetic
predisposition related to the familiar history, environmental factors, and
antigens/auto-antigens promoting division of precursor cells and clonal
evolution.1,4 Moreover, the study of CLL genome by sequencing
approaches revealed novel mutated genes, such as MYD88, NOTCH1, SF3B1, and XPO1, among
others. Importantly, some of these genes may be considered as prognostic
factors.5-6
Another important aspect that modulates the outcome of the disease in CLL patients is
the interaction between neoplastic B-cells with microenvironment substratum and T-cells.
These interactions occur in organized structures termed pseudofollicular proliferative
centers (PC), which are clusters of small lymphocytes dispersed in lymph nodes and bone
marrow. Interestingly, PC are not visualized in any other B-cell neoplasm, and this
structure is considered a hallmark of CLL.7 Data in the literature suggest that the crosstalk between CLL
B-cells, extracellular components of the microenvironment, and T-cells has an important
impact on the physiopathology and evolution of the disease, mainly through regulation of
CLL B-cell expansion, differentiation, and survival. Conversely, this crosstalk may also
induce qualitative and quantitative changes in normal T-cells that could impact the
fitness of the immune system of CLL patients.7-10
Tables 1 and 2 summarize some characteristics of neoplastic B-cells and normal T-cells,
respectively, that may impact in CLL physiopathology.
In addition to these changes in the T-cell compartment, recent data suggest an
accumulation of memory T-cells in CLL patients that is associated with a more aggressive
course of the disease.19,21,30,31 Therefore, this study
aimed to discuss the possible involvement of memory T-cells in the physiopathology and
clinical course of CLL.

Memory T-cells
T-cells play a crucial role in the immune system; they are critical for combating and
controlling tumors and intracellular and extracellular pathogens, acting as cytotoxic
cells (cytotoxic T-lymphocytes [CTL]) or assisting other immune cells (T-helper [Th]
lymphocytes). Importantly, Th lymphocytes differentiate into subsets capable of
producing different cytokine patterns and, therefore, exerting diverse helper
functions.8
The course of immune response can be briefly summarized by initial antigen-specific
stimulation of naive T-cells that results in activation, vigorous proliferation, and
differentiation to specific effector T-cell subpopulations, which are capable of
fighting pathogens and tumor cells.8
After pathogen clearance, the majority of effector T-cells die due to lack of
stimulation with participation of the proapoptotic protein B-cell lymphoma 2 interacting
mediator of cell death (BIM).32 In the
case of chronic activation of T-cells, these may undergo activation-induced cell death
(AICD), a cell death regulatory mechanism mediated by the FAS/ FASL
interaction.33-34 Together, this homeostatic mechanism attempts to restore
the initial 'baseline' immune system and is defined as the contraction phase of immune
response.
However, a small fraction of antigen-specific T-cells are resistant to cell death and
become long-lived memory T-cells. These cells comprise a heterogeneous group that are
more sensitive to low antigen concentrations and that survive in the body to give faster
and more effective antigen-specific responses, providing immediate protection in
peripheral tissues and the ability to confer secondary responses in lymph
nodes.34
Criteria such as immediate effector function, phenotypic diversity, proliferative index,
migratory capability, and anatomical location are used to define memory T-cells in human
models and characterize them in central memory (TCM) and effector memory (TEM) profiles
(Table 3). This classification was proposed
in 1999 by Sallusto et al. and is now widely accepted in the international scientific
literature.35,36

CLL and memory T-cells
As previously mentioned, constant interaction with the microenvironment substratum and
T-cells is essential for CLL B-cells in order to avoid apoptosis and acquire favorable
growing conditions. As a result of this crosstalk, some changes in T-cells are well
documented, but a recent observation that CLL is able to interfere in naive and memory
T-cell status deserves more discussion.19,21,30,31
It has been demonstrated that CLL patients have a significant skewing only in the CD4
T-cell compartment towards TCM and TEM cells.37 Interestingly, this altered T-cell profile was associated with a
more aggressive course of the disease, as shown by the positive association with
unmutated human immunoglobulin heavy chain variable genes (IgVH), advanced
regent admission index clinical stage, and shorter treatment-free survival. Conversely,
there was no correlation between the increase in CD4 memory T-cells and CD38 expression
or genomic aberrations in CLL patients.19
Another study demonstrated that a CLL mouse model had decreased naive T-cells with
concomitant increase in antigenexperienced memory T-cells, mainly the subtypes that have
the ability to migrate to lymph nodes.30 As the background of the mouse model used was the TCL1, which
represents an aggressive CLL, it is possible that the increased numbers of memory
T-cells are related to the aggressiveness of CLL, both in humans and mice.
An interesting question is how the different types of memory T-cells could influence CLL
physiopathology. It has been postulated that chronic antigenic stimulation through the
B-cell receptor (BCR) is required for the neoplastic clone to survive and
grow.38 In this context, CD4 TCM
cells have the capability to migrate to the lymph nodes due to their expression of CXCR5
(a chemokine CXCL13-receptor produced by B-cells in lymph node follicles), and could
interact with CLL B-cells, providing co-stimulatory signals, such as CD40L and
cytokines.36 This crosstalk
could contribute to a stronger BCR signaling, greater survival, expansion, and evolution
of CLL.
In addition, according to the literature on memory T-cell generation, a low but
sufficient activation of naive T-cells is crucial to the differentiation of TCM
cells.39 Associating this
evidence with the fact that CLL B-cells are poor as antigen presenting cells,11 the interaction between CLL B-cells and
naive T-cells could result in a weak stimulation leading to the generation and/or
accumulation of CD4 TCM cells.
Regarding TEM cells, cytokine production of interleukin-4 (IL-4) and interferon-gamma
(IFN-g) could also participate in CLL progression, mainly through the up-regulation of
BCL-2 and protection of CLL cells from apoptosis.40,41 It was demonstrated
that, in in vitro co-culture assays, the apoptosis rate of CLL B-cells
in the presence of CD4 TEM cells was lower than in other conditions, such as in the
presence of either naive CD4 T-cells or peripheral blood mononuclear cells. Moreover,
the protection conferred by CD4 TEM cells seems to depend on IL-4.19
Considered together, the existence of an intrinsic feedback mechanism involved in the
physiopathology of the CLL is supported, in which CLL B-cells could induce the
generation and/or accumulation of CD4 memory T-cells, which, in turn, would help them
achieve better survival and expansion (Figure 1).
Indeed, it was demonstrated that CD4 memory T-cell generation is impaired in mice that
are deficient in B-cells.37,42
Figure 1
Immunological crosstalk between chronic lymphocytic leukemia B-cells and CD4
T-cells.
At the lymph node site, neoplastic B-cells interact with naive and activated CD4
T-cells, resulting in generation/ accumulation of CD4 memory T-cells in peripheral
blood. Through the lymph node homing receptors, chemokine receptors and co-stimulatory
CD4 central memory T-cells could offer survival signals to chronic lymphocytic leukemia
B-cells at lymph node sites. In addition, cytokines produced by CD4 effector memory
T-cells, such as interleukin-4 and interferongamma, could also participate in this
survival process.
Unpublished data from our group supports the aforementioned information. Briefly, we
analyzed the peripheral blood T-cells of 21 CLL patients, and evaluated whether the
distribution of naive and memory T-cells was related to the ZAP-70 expression, a
well-established prognosis factor in CLL.43 Interestingly, this analysis demonstrated that ZAP-70 positive
patients with neoplastic B-cells presented increased frequency and absolute numbers of
CD4 TCM cells compared to the ZAP-70 negative patients and 17 age-matched healthy
individuals (Correia RP, unpublished data). Although other clinical and laboratorial
prognostic markers were not analyzed at this point, the results are in accordance with
the literature that shows alterations in the memory CD4 T-cell subpopulations.
Importantly, it is suggested that this alteration is restricted to the T-helper
compartment, since no significant differences were observed among memory CD8
T-cells.
To the authors' knowledge, there is no study that evidences associations between genetic
factors and T-cell skewing towards memory status. Because the authors believe that this
information is critical for a better evaluation of the prognostic value of analyzing the
memory T-cell compartment, as well as for the understanding of the involvement of CD4
memory T-cells in the pathophysiology of CLL, studies with this focus are underway in
this laboratory.

Conclusions
Abnormalities in T-cell subsets may be associated with the progression of CLL.
Particularly, the increased CD4 memory T-cells could help CLL B-cells to achieve better
fitness, i.e., more survival and proliferation signals. Therefore, understanding and
unraveling this mechanism could improve the prognostic information and therapeutic
approaches in CLL.
