[Abstract, Introduction, Results, Results, Mixed, Mixed, Mixed, Mixed]

ERG induces a mesenchymal-like state associated with chemoresistance in leukemia cells. Overexpression of the oncogene ERG (ETS-related gene) is an adverse prognostic factor in acute myeloid and T-cell lymphoblastic leukemia (AML and T-ALL). We hypothesize that ERG overexpression is associated with primary drug resistance thereby influencing the outcome in leukemia. We previously reported a cell-line based model of ERG overexpression which induced a potentially chemo-resistant spindle shape cell type. Herein, we report a specific transcriptional gene signature for the observed spindle shaped morphology. Genes significantly over-expressed after ERG induction strongly resembled adhesive mesenchymal-like genes that included integrins (ITGA10, ITGB5, ITGB3, ITGA2B), CD44, and CD24. Interestingly, the mesenchymal-like signature was accompanied by the repression of DNA chromatin remodeling and DNA repair genes, such as CHEK1, EZH2, SUZ12, and DNMT3a. The ERG-induced mesenchymal-like signature positively correlated with TMPRSS2-ERG prostate tissues and invasive breast cancer mRNA expression datasets reflecting a general ERG-driven pattern of malignancy. Furthermore, inhibitors modulating ERG druggable pathways WNT, PKC, and AKT, and chemotherapeutic agent cytarabine revealed ERG-induced drug resistance. In particular, PKC412 treatment enhanced proliferative rates and promoted spindle shape formation in ERG-induced cells. Nilotinib and dasatinib were effective at abolishing ERG-induced cells. Moreover, ERG overexpression also led to an increase in double strand breaks. This report provides mechanistic clues into ERG-driven drug resistance in the poor prognostic group of high ERG expressers, provides insight to improved drug targeted therapies, and provides novel markers for a mesenchymal-like state in acute leukemia.

INTRODUCTION
The oncogene ERG belongs to an evolutionary related group of ETS DNA binding proteins and directs gene expression in hematopoietic processes establishing definitive hematopoiesis, maintaining the stem cell pool[1] and promoting megakaryocytic differentiation[2]. Chromosomal aberrations harboring a fusion product of ERG to form FUS/TLS-ERG in acute myeloid leukemia (AML)[3], ERG-EWS in Ewing's sarcoma[4], or TMPRSS2-ERG[5,6] in prostate cancers are predictive of poor prognosis. Likewise, high levels of ERG correlate with a worse outcome in cytogenetically normal AML and acute T-lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL)[7,8]. Mouse models overexpressing Erg clearly revealed an oncogenic phenotype, with high Erg causing fetal hematopoietic progenitors to develop leukemia[2]. Similarly, high ERG expressing bone marrow cells transplanted in adult mice produced Notchl mutations and T cell expansion[9]. Recently it was reported that about 30% of transgenic ERG mouse models develop T-ALL[10] whereas the remainder develop myeloid leukemia at five months[11].
Current chemotherapy regimens are insufficient for high-risk acute leukemia patients characterized by high ERG expression. For instance, in AML, the cumulative incidence of relapse in high ERG expressers was 81%, in comparison to only 33% in low ERG expressers at 5-years[7]. Similarly, the overall survival of high ERG expressers in T-ALL at 5 year years is only 26% versus 58% in low ERG expressers[8]. Thus, understanding the ERG gene regulatory networks responsible for treatment failure and involved in drug resistance at the molecular level will aid in understanding the etiology of high ERG expression in acute leukemia.
Due to the high incidence of TMPRSS2-ERG fusion in prostate cancer, recent studies have mainly focused on mapping ERG signaling networks in prostate. These networks comprise a diaspora of functions that show a role for ERG in the regulation of extracellular matrix through the plasminogen activator pathway[12], upregulation of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) genes[13], ERG-mediated regulation of chromatin though binding to the EZH2 promoter, and DNA repair regulation through poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) interactions[14]. This composite ERG gene signatures correlates well with the clinical characteristics of prostate cancer, and is thought to contribute to disease progression in prostate cancer[15,16].
While it is unarguable that ERG overexpression is involved in oncogenesis of leukemia and prostate cancers, much less is clear as to how ERG signaling mediates drug resistance. Emerging reports describe EMT in tumor progression as a mechanism for cell proliferative and survival advantages[17]. EMT is defined as an epithelial cell undergoing transformation, acquiring mesenchymal-like features that allow a cell to be motile and able to migrate. This process requires specific changes in gene regulation and is remarkably reversible (termed mesenchyme-to-epithelial, MET) via epigenetic changes[18]. Moreover, the acquisition of mesenchyme-like (derived from MET) properties in both malignant cells and non-epithelial cells has been proposed as a mechanism for drug resistance in solid tumors of the lung, breast, prostate[18] and in chronic myeloid leukemia[17]. Several ETS transcription factors have been implicated in turning on an EMT-like program and, likewise, studies in cancer cells document enhanced cell migration in EMT overexpressing cells[19,20]. Taken together, these studies support the notion that EMT in high ERG expressers may contribute to drug resistance in prostate carcinoma. Herein, we report that in leukemia, ERG overexpression causes molecular characteristics that are strikingly similar to the ERG-associated signaling networks in prostate cancer. ERG overexpression induces a mesenchymal-like state with a highly drug resistant phenotype, pronounced proliferative growth advantage, and promotes double strand breaks (DSBs) formation. Our findings may have important clinical implications for the improvement of current therapies in adult leukemia.

RESULTS
ERG induction promotes mesenchymal-like gene expression signature accompanied by repression of DNA remodeling and DNA repair
We previously reported that prolonged ERG overexpression induced leukemia cells to adhere and develop bi-directional protrusions (spindle shaped cells) (Fig. 1A). This morphogenic state was in part attributable to the upreguation of WNT11[21]. However the overall transcriptional program for this morphogenesis had not been characterized (Fig 1A). Herein, we sought to elucidate the morphogenesis program responsible for the spindle shape formation upon ERG induction by determining the global transcription profile of leukemic K562 cells harbouring tet-on inducible ERG expression constructs. When comparing global gene expression of ERG-induced cells versus non-induced cells, 128 genes were differentially over-expressed whereas 1440 were differentially under-expressed (Figure 1B, fold change >=2; p<0.05). Through Gene Ontology (GO) analyses, the over-expressed genes were significantly enriched for cell adhesion, migration, and motility (Table 1, top), a pattern that highly resembled the adhesive EMT properties and included integrin upregulation. We verified by PCR upregulation of gene products associated with biological adhesion and morphogenesis including: CD24, CD44, ITGA10, PLAUR CXCL11, SELP, TYROBP, FLT4, and SHANK3 (Figure 1C). While the EMT/MET genetic program has yet to be fully understood in cancer, recent studies showed that upregulation of two novel EMT key markers, CD44 and CD24, are necessary for entry into a mesenchymal-like state in highly drug resistant breast HER2 positive carcinoma[25]. Contrary to typical EMT/MET, the EMT markers E- and N-cadherin were not differentially altered by ERG overexpression, suggesting that the EMT/MET gene signature may be different in leukemia than in breast cancer. NUMB, both a binding target of ERG[26] and reported to be involved in EMT regulation[27], was also under-expressed (Figure 1C). Additional ERG under-expressed genes were enriched for the GO term "DNA homologous recombination and repair" including the CHEK1, ATM, and BRCA1 DNA repair genes (Table 1, bottom). DNA chromatin remodeling proteins, such as EZH2, SUZ12, and DNMT3a, were also under-expressed (Figure 1C), as observed in prostate cancer studies[14,28]. Hence, repression of DNA repair and DNA chromatin remodeling genes may provide a link to the molecular mechanisms through which ERG overexpressing cells induce a mesenchymal-like state.
Figure 1
ERG overexpression induces a mesenchymal-like signature accompanied by repression of DNA homologous recombination repair gene expression
A) Fluorescence imaging of ERG-induced cells (+ ERG, DsRed fluorescence) developing spindle shape formation following DOX stimulation for 96 hours. Rabbit anti-WNT11 antibody (1:100) coupled with goat anti-rabbit IgG-FITC (1:100) was used for colocalization with DsRed positive (+ERG). DAPI (1:100) was used to stain the nuclei. Non-induced (-ERG, left) maintain the native round morphology with basal levels of WNT11 on the cell surface. WNT11, a direct target of ERG, localizes to the nuclei and along the spindle branches (center, 400X magnifications and right, 200X magnification). B) Heat map displaying the ERG gene signature derived from three stable transfected K562 pTRE-ERG clones (CL4, CL46 and CL9, referred to as 4, 46 and 9) induced with DOX for 6 days. Red to orange hues, strong expression; blue to yellow hues, low expression of induced cells relative to non-induced cells. A 2-fold cut off was used to determine the significance of over-expressed (128) and under-expressed genes (1440). C) RT PCR validation of novel ERG transcriptional targets from Figure 1B related to kinase, DNA modification, or adhesion. Fold mRNA expression (y-axis) of each gene reports the ratio between induced and non-induced ERG mRNA expression. RT PCR was conducted in duplicate and bar graphs represent the data for the CL9 K562 pTRE-ERG clone.
We then used Oncomine, a microarray cancer database, to assess whether ERG-induced gene signature generated from the K562 pTRE-ERG leukemia cell line was disease-relevant. 128 over-expressed genes were uploaded to Oncomine platform. ERG-induced gene signature positively correlated with three invasive and metastatic cancer mRNA expression dataseis: 1) Grasso dataset prostate tissues habouring ERG rearrangement versus no ERG rearrangement[29], 2) Grasso dataset of prostate carcinoma tissues versus normal prostate gland[29] and 3) Stickeler dataset of invasive breast cancer patients treated with a standard regimen of chemotherapy assessing post-chemotherapy versus pretreatment changes[30] (Supplement Figure 1A-D and Supplement Table 1). Of note, in the latter dataset, 17 of 25 patients with invasive breast cancer did not result in complete remission indicating that the analysis of transcriptionally deregulated genes could aid in predicting the clinical response to cancer treatment. Recent studies in a prostate cell line over-expressing ERG also concur with our results, i.e. they exhibit highly enriched cell adhesion and cell migration GO terms[31] and promote EMT gene expression[32], thus providing further support for an ERG-driven mesenchymal-like state in leukemia. Taken together, the positive correlation of ERG-induced mesenchymal-like gene signature in leukemia with solid tumor prostate cancer tissues demonstrate that an ERG-specific gene signature is induced, which is independent of disease origin, and may provide sensitive molecular targets of prognostic value, thereby aiding in predicting the outcome or response to therapy.

ERG overexpression results in a profound apoptotic resistance
Recently, we reported that ERG overexpression conferred resistance to the multi-kinase inhibitors TKI258 and sorafinib[26]. A panel of 15 drugs was selected to further explore the ERG-driven drug resistance. From our own studies in leukemia cells and previous reports in prostate cancer genes, we selected the ERG-targeted networks to include: WNT signaling[21], AKT/PI3K signalling[26,33], ERK[34], DNA repair[35], and DNA chromatin remodeling (Table 2)[36]. ERG-induced drug resistance was determined by three criteria: 1) the significant difference in apoptotic induction in non-induced cells in comparison with ERG-induced cells, 2) the maintenance or expansion of ERG-induced cells (DsRed positive and absence of apoptosis), 3) by the persistence of spindle shape cells upon drug treatment (Table 2). Under those conditions, ERG-induced cells were considered resistant to the following agents: LY294002, rapamycin, quercetin, PKC412, cytarabine (Ara-C), ICG-001, and TKI258 as previously determined[26] (Figure 2A, upper panel). Remarkably, ERG-induced cells were not only resilient to apoptosis when treated with Ara-C, LY294002, or PKC412 but also displayed sustained DsRed population upon Ara-C treatment and expansion of the DsRed population upon PKC412 or LY294002 treatment (Figure 2A, lower panel). Moreover, treatment with AKT inhibitor, LY294002, or PKC inhibitor, PKC412 enhanced spindle shape formation (Table 2). Conversely, ERG-induced cells were sensitive to daunorubicin, dasatinib, nilotinib, and 5-azacytidine as assessed from the diminishing DsRed positive population, and increasing Annexin V-FITC population. The extent of cell death upon PD325901 treatment between ERG-induced and non-induced cells did not differ; however given that the DsRed positive population was depleted, ERG-induced cells were considered sensitive to PD325901. Drugs that did affect apoptosis in both ERG-induced and non-induced cells were 3-deazaneplanocin A and olaparib (AZD2281). The lack of 3-deazaneplanocin A (EZH2 inhibitor)[36] and AZD2281 (PARP inhibitor)[37] effectiveness in ERG-induced cells may be due to repression of the drug targets EZH2 and CHEK1. We conclude that ERG-induced cells are resistant to Ara-C, WNT inhibitors, drugs targeting the protein kinase C pathway (PKC412) and downstream effectors: i.e. the PI3K inhibitors LY294002 and rapamycin. Thus, PKC kinase inhibitors, WNT inhibitors and Ara-C are predicted not to be effective in clearing ERG overexpressing cells in leukemia. By contrast, nilotinib is expected to reverse drug resistance, by selectively enhancing apoptosis most potently in cell model system overexpressing ERG.
Figure 2
Drugs testing various branches of ERG targeted pathways elicit ERG-mediated drug resistance, which is enhanced by the presence of HS-5 and AML MSCs
A panel of 15 drugs (Table 2) was surveyed to determine the extent of ERG dependent drug resistance. ERG-induced and non-induced cells were treated with 15 drug candidates aimed at inducing apoptosis and traced by Annexin V-FITC. Values plotted are the total Annexin V-FITC positive cell population of ERG-induced (+ERG, black bars) and non-induced cells (-ERG, grey bars). Upper plot, ranking by ERG resistance to apoptosis; lower plot, ERG-induced cells (non-apoptotic) were tracked by DsRed fluorescence (+ERG, red bars). Representative results for the CL9 clone are plotted. The error bars denote the standard deviation

ERG overexpressing cells cultured on primary AML-derived stroma have a proliferative growth advantage
Given the survival properties of ERG overexpression, we examined the proliferative properties of ERG-induced cells. CFSE labeled ERG-induced cells displayed a 2-fold proliferative advantage over non-induced cells at 72-hours (Figure 2B). Proliferative growth was further enhanced by PKC412 treatment in ERG-induced cells over non-induced cells, and treatment with Ara-C resulted in minimal advantage over the non-induced group. To further monitor this proliferative advantage, co-cultured ERG-induced cells were harvested in direct contact with the HS-5 stromal layer. Also in this case, ERG-induced cells manifested a 2-fold greater rate of proliferation than cells cultured without stroma (Figure 2B). We further tested the proliferative effect of the direct contact of stroma mesenchymal cells with ERG-induced cells from three AML donors, which confirmed a similar rapid decay rate of CFSE, as observed with the HS-5 co-culture. These results demonstrate a synergistic interaction between ERG overexpressing cells and the contacting HS-5 stroma, or primary AML MSC.
We also investigated ERG-overexpressing cells treated with PKC412, to test the effect of drug resistance in the presence of HS-5 and AML MSCs. Untreated ERG DsRed positive cells were expanded in the presence of HS-5 (10%) but not in the presence of AML MSCs. However, ERG-induced cells (DsRed positive) treated with PKC412 expanded by 40% in co-culture with HS-5 and 20% with AML MSCs (Figure 2C). Thus, ERG-dependent resistance to apoptotic induction was enhanced via stroma protection through cell-to-cell contacts upon PKC412 treatment, in comparison with 80% apoptotic induction in non-induced cells.

Blocking CD44 by antibody binding inhibits ERG-induced spindle shape morphology
Due to the enhanced survival of ERG-induced cells, we sought to identify potential adhesion molecules induced by ERG overexpression that would regulate cell-to-cell contacts. A key regulator of mesenchymal-like properties is CD44, a major adhesion molecule for homing, cell migration, and signal transduction[18]. Deregulated CD44 contributes to leukemogenesis, and blocking CD44-mediated adhesion by complexing antibodies to aid in the detachment of leukemia cells from the bone marrow niche has been proposed as a targeted therapy in leukemia[38]. CD44 was significantly over-expressed (2-fold) in the ERG-induced clones. Therefore, we tested a CD44 blocking antibody in culture with ERG-induced and non-induced cells (Figure 3A and 3B). Addition of a CD44 blocking antibody completely abrogated the spindle shape formation in ERG-induced cells, whereas IgG alone did not elicit any morphological changes. ERG-induced cells were then treated with PKC412 to enhance spindle shape formation. In this case, antibody blocking of CD44 inhibited spindle shape formation and reduced cell adhesion by 75%, whereas IgG antibody had no effect. Thus, ERG-induced spindle shape formation is mediated by CD44. We also measured apoptosis to determine the effect of CD44 block on ERG-induced cells. Only marginal changes in apoptosis (Figure 2A) were observed, affirming that CD44's main function is to aid cell-to-cell adhesion of in ERG-induced cells. Thus, disruption of ERG-mediated adhesion via a CD44 block may be of therapeutic significance in combination with current treatment protocols.
Figure 3
ERG-mediated drug resistance is enhanced by the presence of HS-5 and AML MSCs
A) Histograms displaying the decay of CFSE dye as a function of cell division (proliferation) of ERG-induced (+ERG, DsRed positive and CFSE) and non-induced (-ERG, DsRed negative and CFSE) cells. Co-culture in the presence of HS-5 stroma or primary AML-derived MSCs was for 96 hours. Plotted below each histogram is the cumulative distribution function (CDF) plot (black) or the fluorescence distribution (red) for visualization of CFSE decay rates of +ERG versus -ERG cells in the presence of HS-5, AML MSCs, or treatment with Ara-C or PKC412. B) ERG-inducible (+ERG) and non-inducible (-ERG) cells were treated with PKC412 (72 hours) in the presence of either HS-5 stroma or 3 primary AML MSCs. Apoptosis in response to PKC412 was measured with Annexin-V-FITC. ERG-induced cells were traced by DsRed (red bars); ERG-induced apoptotic cells were double positive (DsRed and Annexin V-FITC; white bars), whereas non-induced apoptotic cells were only positive for Annexin V-FITC (black bars). UT, untreated cells processed in parallel. The drug screen, CFSE, and stroma co-culture experiments were conducted in duplicates for both stably transfected K562 pTRE-ERG CL9 and CL46 clones. Representative results for the CL9 clone are plotted in A) and B). The error bars denote the standard deviation.

Overexpression of ERG involves ERK 1/2 phosphorylation
Current evidence supports the notion that, in cancer. MET (as opposed to EMT) is turned on in malignant cells to promote cell proliferation, migration, and evasion from apoptosis[18]. Genome-wide studies demonstrated that ERG activates the RAS/ERK pathway in a transgenic ERG leukemic model[ll], and regulates cell migration in prostate cells[34]. Therefore, we sought to determine if ERG overexpression affected the phosphorylation levels of ERK1/2. Potent ERG overexpression induced higher pan ERK levels compared to non-induced cells, and the effect was enhanced with PKC412 and Ara-C treatment (Figure 4). Endogenous levels of phosphorylated ERK1/2 in ERG-induced cells were also elevated (including with Ara-C treatment), whereas no differences were observed in cells treated with PKC412. The lack of phosphorylation changes in ERK1/2 in cells treated with PKC412 suggests that other residues may be phosphorylated to enhance ERK signal transduction in ERG-induced cells. The upregulated levels of pan and phosphorylated ERK1/2 in ERG-induced cells indicate that signaling is upstream leading to adhesion and resistance to PKC412 and Ara-C treatment.
Figure 4
Spindle shape formation induced by ERG overexpression is inhibited by a CD44 blocking antibody
A) Representative fluorescence images data of K562 leukemia ERG-induced (+ERG) and non-induced (-ERG) cells after treatment for 72 hours with PKC412, blocking anti-CD44 (1:500 dilution) antibody alone, or the combined PKC412 and anti-CD44 (1:500 dilution) antibody. ERG-induced cells express DsRed and their nuclei were stained with DAPI. B) Graph of cells (counts) developing spindle shape formation for ERG-induced (+ERG) and non-induced cells (-ERG). ERG-induced and non-induced cells were treated with PKC412 to promote ERG dependent spindle-shape formation. The combination of ERG induction and PKC412 treatment induced potent spindle shaped cells in numbers greater than 20/field, which exceeds the error probability of an accurate cell count number. Thus, an upper limit of 20 spindle shaped cells/field was set. The graph represents the results of one of two experiments.

Overexpression of ERG generates genomic instability
Due to the severe downregulation of DNA repair gene expression in ERG overexpressing cells (Table 1) and in prostate cancer studies[14], we examined ERG overexpressing cells for the presence of DSBs by performing a neutral comet assay[24], with and without Ara-C or PKC412 treatments. The percentage of DNA in the comet tail reflects the number of DSBs. Non-induced cells displayed, on average, 30% tail DNA, whereas ERG-induced cells harbored a significant greater amount (45-50%) (Figure 5). Treatment of non-induced cells with Ara-C or PKC412 increased the percent tail DNA, as expected, to 50% compared to untreated controls. However, ERG-induced cells treated with the cytotoxic drugs showed a significant reduction of DSBs (10% tail DNA with Ara-C and 30% with PKC412). We attribute the reduction of % tail DNA in ERG-induced cells treated with PKC412 to the activation of alternate DNA repair mechanisms, such as non-homologous end-joining, possibly to sustain high DNA replication rates (proliferative growth). Taken together, our data indicate that upon ERG induction, the oncogene generates increased DNA damage (DSBs) and that the effect may be reversed by treatment with Ara-C and PKC412. These observations complement the observed expansion of DsRed in ERG-induced cells and the enhanced proliferative rate in the presence of PKC412 (Figure 2A and B). Hence, aberrant DNA repair may contribute to the multifactorial drug-mediated resistance in high ERG expressers in leukemia.
Figure 5
Intracellular staining of pan and phosphorylated ERK1/2 levels increase in cells with ERG overexpression
ERG-induced (+ERG) and non-induced (-ERG) cells were probed for intracellular levels of pan ERK1/2 and P-ERK1/2 (pT202/p204), left and right panels, respectively. To determine the extent of ERK activation, ERG-induced (+ERG) and non-induced cells (-ERG) were treated with either PKC412 or Ara-C for 24 hours. Plotted is a representative graph for intracellular probing for pan and phosphorylated levels of ERK1/2 and conducted in duplicate and duplicate in K562 pTRE-ERG clones, CL9 and CL46 clones.
