[Abstract, Methods, Methods, Mixed]

Leukemogenesis Induced by an Activating ?-catenin mutation in Osteoblasts. Summary Cells of the osteoblast lineage affect homing, 1, 2 number of long term repopulating hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) 3, 4, HSC mobilization and lineage determination and B lymphopoiesis 5-8. More recently osteoblasts were implicated in pre-leukemic conditions in mice 9, 10. Yet, it has not been shown that a single genetic event taking place in osteoblasts can induce leukemogenesis. We show here that in mice, an activating mutation of b-catenin in osteoblasts alters the differentiation potential of myeloid and lymphoid progenitors leading to development of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) with common chromosomal aberrations and cell autonomous progression. Activated b-catenin stimulates expression of the Notch ligand Jagged-1 in osteoblasts. Subsequent activation of Notch signaling in HSC progenitors induces the malignant changes. Demonstrating the pathogenetic role of the Notch pathway, genetic or pharmacological inhibition of Notch signaling ameliorates AML. Nuclear accumulation and increased b-catenin signaling in osteoblasts was also identified in 38% of patients with MDS/AML. These patients showed increased Notch signaling in hematopoietic cells. These findings demonstrate that genetic alterations in osteoblasts can induce AML, identify molecular signals leading to this transformation and suggest a potential novel pharmacotherapeutic approach to AML.

Methods Summary
Mice
Generation of a1(I)Collagen-Cre [a1(I)Col-Cre], Catnb+/lox(ex3), bcat(ex3)osb and Jagged-1fl/fl mice has previously been reported. All the protocols and experiments were conducted according to the guidelines of the Institute of Comparative Medicine, Columbia University.
Patient samples
Bone marrow biopsies from patients with AML and MDS were consecutively obtained from 2000-2008 and reviewed under a research exempt waiver approved by the institutional review boards (IRB) of Memorial Sloan Kettering Hospital and Columbia University and Human Biospecimen Utilization Committee.
More details in Full Methods in Supplementary Information.

Methods
Animals
Generation of a1(I)Collagen-Cre [a1(I)Col-Cre], and Catnb+/lox(ex3) mice has previously been reported 31-33. Catnb+/lox(ex3) mice, express a b-catenin mutant allele in which exon 3, encoding all serine and threonine residues phosphorylated by glycogen synthase kinase 3b(GSK-3b) (Logan and Nusse, 2004), is flanked by loxP sites. Mice with osteoblast-specific constitute activation of b-catenin were generated by crossing Catnb+/lox(ex3) mice with a1(I)Col-Cre mice expressing Cre under the control of 2.3 kb of the proximal promoter of the mouse pro- a1(I)Collagen gene. The transgene is expressed at high levels in osteoblasts specifically 34. There is no expression in chondrocytes, condensed mesenchymal cells, perichondrial or periosteal fibroblasts, or any other type I collagen-producing cells, or other fibroblast-rich tissues such as muscle, heart or tendons. The resulting offspring, termed bcat(ex3)osb, express a constitutive active b-catenin allele in osteoblasts. Mice with osteoblast-specific deletion of Jagged-1 were generated by crossing previously described Jagged1fl/fl mice 35 with a1(I)Col-Cre mice. Genotyping was performed at weaning stage by PCR analysis of genomic DNA. In each experiment the mice used were of the same genetic background as they were all littermates. Female mice at 1 month of age were used for the bone histomorphometric analysis. bcat(ex3)osb mice lack teeth due to osteopetrosis and therefore were fed a normal powdered diet that contained all the required nutrients (20% protein, 3.0 ppm Folic Acid, 51 mcg/kg B12 from PicoLab Rodent Diet 20, Cat. Nu. 5053). Folate and B12 levels in their blood were normal (folate > 24 ng/ml and B12 > 1,000 pg/ml) confirming adequate intake of critical nutrients. Folate and B12 levels were measured by Antech Diagnostics using a chemiluminescence-based kit (Siemens). All the protocols and experiments were conducted according to the guidelines of the Institute of Comparative Medicine, Columbia University.
Patient samples
Bone marrow biopsies from patients with AML and MDS were consecutively obtained from 2000-2008 and reviewed under a research exempt waiver approved by the institutional review board (IRB) of Memorial Sloan Kettering Hospital and Human Biospecimen Utilization Committee. Bone marrow biopsies and aspirates obtained from Columbia University from patients with MDS and AML were stored in IRB-approved Tissue Repository at Columbia University Medical Center after informed consent. This study was conducted under protocol approval from the IRB for use of samples from the Tissue Repository.
Karyotype analysis
Metaphase chromosome preparations were prepared from cells obtained from spleen specimens from bcat(ex3)osb mice after overnight culture in complete RPMI medium using standard methods. Giemsa banding was performed and the images were captured using Cytovision Imaging system (Applied Imaging, Santa Clara, CA) attached to a Nikon Ecliplse 600 microscope. Twenty to 30 karyotypes were prepared from each sample and described using the standard chromosome nomenclature for mice.
Array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH)
aCGH analysis was performed in the spleen of bcat(ex3)osb mice using the Mouse genome CGH 244A Platform (Agilent Technologies) according to the manufacturer's instructions. In brief, spleen DNA from wild type littermates was used as reference DNA. Genomic DNA was subjected to restriction digestion prior to labeling and purification (SureTag DNA labeling kit, Agilent Technologies). For each 244 K array, 2 mg of labeled DNA and 2 mg of germline reference DNA were labelled with Cy5 and Cy3, respectively. Differentially labeled test (tumor) DNA and normal reference DNA were hybridized simultaneously to normal chromosome spreads. Data extraction was conducted using the Agilent feature extraction software. Data files were analyzed using the Agilent DNA analytics software. Data were deposited in Gene Expression Omnibus (Accession Number GSE51690)
Whole-exome capture and massively parallel sequencing, sequence mapping and identification of tumor-specific variants
For three tumor and three unpaired normal samples, purified genomic DNA (3 mg) was enriched in protein-coding sequences using the SureSelect Mouse All Exon kit (Agilent Technologies) following standard protocols. The resulting target-enriched pool was amplified and subjected to paired-end sequencing (2x100 bp) by using HiSeq2000 sequencing instruments. Exome capture and sequencing procedures were performed at Agilent Technologies. Sequencing reads were mapped to the reference genome mm10 using the Burrows-Wheeler Aligner (BWA) alignment tool version 0.5.9 36. We identified sites that differed from the reference genome (called here variants) and constructed empirical priors for the distribution of variant frequencies in each sample independently. We obtained high-credibility intervals (posterior probability >=1-10-5) for the observed frequency of the variants using the SAVI (Statistical Algorithm for Variant Identification) algorithm 37.
Variants were considered absent if found with a frequency between 0 and 2%, and were considered present if detected with a frequency above 15%. We chose 15% as a cut-off given its correspondence with the sensitivity threshold of direct Sanger sequencing. Variant total depth was required to be >10x and <300x. Segmenting variants that exist in one case only and absent in the other five cases identified regions of possible copy number aberrations. We removed the variants found in these regions. We also excluded all silent variants and those present in dbSNP database, and focused only on substitution mutations. Finally, in the tumor samples, we removed all variants found present in any of the normal samples.
The mutations were subjected to validation (present in tumor, absent in normal) by conventional Sanger-based re-sequencing analysis of PCR products obtained from tumor DNA using primers specific for the exon encompassing the variant. Data were deposited in Short Read Archive (Accession Number SRP031981).
Microarray
Total RNA was extracted from primary osteoblasts isolated from mouse calvaria using Trizol reagent (Invitrogen). Microarray analysis was performed using the GeneChip 3' IVT Express kit and mouse genome 430 2.0 array gene chips (Affymetrix) according to the manufacturer's instructions. In brief aRNA was synthesized from 500 ng of RNA and was biotinylated followed by purification and fragmentation using the GeneChip 3' IVT Express kit. Fragmented aRNA was hybridized to Affymetrix mouse genome 430 2.0 array gene chips. Following hybridization chips were scanned with a Genechip Scanner 3000 7G (Affymetrix). Data were normalized using the Mas5 method 38, and then log2 transformed. Data were deposited in Gene Expression Omnibus (Accession Number GSE43242) 39, Differential expression was analyzed using the LIMMA 40. We focused on about 20 genes which we selected in advance of the analysis. Genes were considered which either are active in AML, are amplified according to our CGH results, activate Notch, or whose transcription is induced by Notch. A significance cutoff of a raw p <0.05 was used, as is appropriate for small previously-determined genesets 41. Representative probesets of genes whose expression changed greater than +- 20% in at least one of the 2 mutants relative to WT appear in Supplementary Table 1.
Bone marrow transplantation
For bone marrow transplantation studies, adult, wild type B5.SJL (CD45.1) recipient mice (8 weeks of age) were lethally irradiated (10Gy, split dose) and were then transplanted with 1x105 of total bone marrow cells from bcat(ex3)osb (CD45.2) or wild type B5.SJL (CD45.2) mice (4 weeks of age) by retro-orbital venous plexus injection. Engraftment efficiency in recipients was monitored by donor contribution of CD45.2+ cells using FACS analysis. For reverse experiment, because of the early lethality of bcat(ex3)osb mice,1x105 of total bone marrow cells from wild type B6.SJL (CD45.1) mice were transplanted into lethally irradiated (600 rads, split dose) newborn (P1) bcat(ex3)osb mice or wild type littermates by liver injections. Engraftment efficiency in recipients was monitored by donor contribution of CD45.1+ cells using FACS analysis. For HSC and progenitor transplantation studies, sublethally (5.5 Gy) irradiated wild type B5.SJL (CD45.1) recipient mice (8 weeks of age) were injected with fractionated donor bone marrow subsets isolated from bcat(ex3)osb (CD45.2) or wild type B5.SJL (CD45.2) mice (4 weeks of age). Engraftment efficiency in recipients was monitored by donor contribution of CD45.2+ cells using FACS analysis.
Treatment of animals with g-secretase inhibitor
Two-week old bcat(ex3)osb mice or the wild type littermates were treated with vehicle, the g-secretase inhibitor DBZ ((2S)-2-[2-(3,5-difluorophenyl)-acetylamino]-N-(5-methyl-6-oxo-6,7-dihydro-5H-dibenzo[b,-d]azepin-7-yl)-propionamide, 2 mmol/kg) daily by intraperitoneal injection for 10 days. DBZ is cell-permeable, selective, nontransition sate and noncompetitive inhibitor of the g-secretase complex. DBZ was synthesized to >99.9% purity as assessed by LC/MS (Syncom) and suspended in a 0.5% Methocel E4M (wt/vol, Colorcon) and 0.1% (vol/vol) Tween-80 (Sigma) solution 42. Immediately before intraperitoneal injection, DBZ was sonicated for 2 minutes to achieve a homogenous suspension.
Hematological measurements and peripheral blood morphology
For hematological measurements, blood was collected by cardiac puncture. Peripheral blood cell counts were performed on a FORCYTE Hematology Analyzer (Oxford Science Inc.). For morphological assessment, peripheral blood smears were stained with Wright-Giemsa stain (Sigma-Aldrich) for 10 minutes followed by rinsing in dH2O for 3 minutes. Images were taken using a 60x objective on a Leica microscope outfitted with camera.
Real-time PCR
Total RNA was isolated from LSK or hematopoietic cells using RNAeasy micro Plus kit (Quiagen). Total RNA from bone marrow-free long bones was isolated using TRIzol reagent after removal of the periosteal layer. Quantitative real-time PCR was performed using the SYBR Green Master Mix (Bio-Rad) as previously described 33. b-Actin was used as endogenous control. Gene expression in LT-HSCs, ST-HSCs and MPPs was performed using the Power Syber Green Cells-to -CT kit (Ambion Life Technologies)
Reporter constructs and luciferase assays
The Jagged-1 promoter region carries multiple potential TCF/LEF binding sites (C/TCTTTG) located up to nucleotide -4075 (4075, -3072, -2626, -2578, -2343, -1992, 1957, -1566, -1221, -782). The mouse reporter constructs -4112/+130 and -2100/+130 for Jagged-1-luc were generated by PCR amplification of the corresponding fragments using mouse genomic DNA as template and subsequent subcloning into the BglII and KpnI-BglII sites of the pGL3Basic vector (Promega), respectively. Transient transfection assays were performed in HEK293T using Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Cells were seeded in 24 well plates at a density of 0.3x105 cells/well. 24h later, cells were transfected with a total amount of 350ng of DNA containing 150ng reporter plasmid and 50 ng b-catenin and TCF-1 expression vectors. 5ng of pRL-CMV Renilla (Promega) was used as an internal control to normalize for transfection efficiency and equivalent amounts of DNA were achieved with pcDNA3 vector. Forty hours after transfection luciferase activity was determined using the Dual Luciferase Reporter Assay System (Promega) and quantified using Fluostar Omega (BMG Labtech Inc). Luciferase activity is presented as fold induction over basal conditions normalized to empty luciferase vector for identical experimental conditions.
Chromatin Immunoprecipitation (ChiP) assay
Primary osteoblasts were seeded in 10 cm dishes at a density of 5 x106. Cells were cross-linked with 1% formaldehyde for 10 min. Following Dounce homogenization, nuclei were collected and sonicated on ice to an average length of 0.5 kb. The samples were centrifuged and precleared with protein G in the presence of sonicated lDNA and bovine serum albumin for 2 h at 4 degC. One-tenth of the volume of supernatant was used as input, and the remaining volume was immunoprecipitated with b-catenin antibody and the immune complexes were collected by absorption to protein G-sepharose, washed, eluted from the beads and incubated for 5 h at 65 degC to reverse cross-links. After treatment with proteinase K, DNA was extracted with phenol-chloroform and precipitated with ethanol. Immunoprecipitated chromatin was analyzed by PCR using primers corresponding to TCF/LEF binding sites on the Jagged-1 promoter (-4075, -3072, -2626, -2578, -2343, -1992, -1957, -1566, -1221, -782). Putative binding elements were identified by using the TRANSFAC database. The products of the PCR amplifications were analyzed by agarose gel electrophoresis.
Antibodies and Flow Cytometry analysis
Freshly isolated bone marrow cells and spleen cells were resuspended in flow-staining buffer (PBS plus 2% FBS) and the primary conjugated antibodies were added. After 30 minutes incubation at 4degC, the cells were then washed twice before flow cytometry analysis. The following monoclonal antibodies conjugated with fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC) , Allophycocyanin (APC) phycoerythrin (PE) , PE-Cy7, APC-CY7, Per-CPCY5.5, Pacific Blue, and Alexa 700 were used: CD117 (c-kit; 2B8), Sca-1 (D7), Mac-1a (M1/70), Gr-1(RB6-8C5), TER-119, (Ly-76) B220 (CD45R), CD19 (1D3), IgM (R6-60.2), CD3 (17A2), CD4 (RM4-5), CD8a (53-6.7), CD34 (RAM34), CD45 (30-F11), CD31 (MEC 13.3), CD16/CD32 (FcgRII/III; 2.4G2), CD135 (A2F10.1), CD150 (9D1), CD71 (C2), CD45.2 (104), CD45.1 (A20), F4/80. Non-phospho (Active) b-Catenin (S33/S37/T41) antibody, IL-7Ra (SB199), Jagged-1 (C-20) (Cell Signaling; D13A1). Seven-color flow cytometry acquisition was performed using a LSR II flow cytometer (Becton Dickinson) and analysis using FLO-JO software (Treestar, Inc). Cells were gated for size, shape and granularity using forward and side scatter parameters. The positive populations were identified as cells that expressed specific levels of fluorescence activity above the nonspecific auto fluorescence of the isotype control. Nonspecific binding was reduced by preincubation with unconjugated anti-FcRII/III (2.4G2). Osteoblasts from MDS/AML patients or healthy subjects were idemtified as CD34-/Lin-OCN+ cells, (OCN: osteocalcin an osteoblast-specific protein used for isolation of live osteoblastic cells). For Flow sorting bone marrow, spleen and thymus cells were resuspended in flow staining buffer at 1 x 106/ml and labeled with the appropriate conjugated antibodies. After 30 minutes incubation, cells were washed twice using flow buffer. Flow sorting was performed using FACSAria (Becton Dickinson). Sorted populations were subsequently cultured or stored in RLT buffer at -80 degC for later extraction of RNA. Fluorescence intensity plots were presented in log scale. All flow cytometry data are representative of five independent experiments.
Clonogenic Assay
Bone marrow cells from 4-week old bcat(ex3)osb or wild type mice were cultured in DMEMa with 10% FBS in the presence of 10 ng/ml of GM-CSF or M-CSF or G-CSF for 7 days. An aliquot of the cells was used to prepare Cytospins and stained with Giemsa to identify blasts. A second aliquot was analyzed by flow cytometry for expression of F4/80, CD11b and Gr1.
Isolation and counting of osteoblasts from murine and human bone
The periosteal layer was removed from murine tibia and femurs, the remaining bone was crushed and washed to remove the bone marrow and bone pieces were digested with Collagenase type III. Osteopetrosis in bcat(ex3)osb mice does not allow the use of only endosteal bone due to dispersion in the marrow space of irregular trabecular units. Human bone biopsies were dissected into pieces and fat and clot was removed from bone chips and a 3 mm section was transferred into 500 ml aMEM with 1% Pen/Strep. Scissors were used to cut the bone chip into a slurry and then the slurry was digested in 500uL FBS-free aMEM (1% Pen/Strep) and 4mg/mL Collagenase type III (Worthington) for final concentration of 2mg/ml. After incubation for 1 hour with intermittent vortexing, slurry was frozen live for later use in 90% FBS with 10% DMSO. For flow cytometry analysis, osteoblasts were identified from the digested bone samples as a population of CD34-Lin-Ocn+ cells, where OCN (osteocalcin) is an osteoblast-specific, non-nuclear protein commonly used for isolation of live osteoblastic cells 43-45. For microarray analysis and for experiments in mice, all gene expression studies were repeated using calvaria-derived cells a population rich in committed osteoblast progenitors and routinely used as osteoblast-representative. Primary murine osteoblasts were prepared from calvaria of 2 day-old pups as previously described 46, 47. Mice calvaria were sequentially digested for 20, 40, and 90 min at 37degC in a modified minimal essential medium (GIBCO)-10% FBS containing 0.1 mg of collagenase P (Worthington) per ml and 0.25% trypsin (Gibco). Cells of the first two digests were discarded, whereas cells released from the third digestion were plated in a minimal essential medium-10% FBS.
Osteoblasts were counted in each human bone biopsy as defined by standard histomorphometry guidelines 48-50. The number of osteoblasts per mm of bone surface is calculated. The number of osteoblasts counted depends on the size of the sample and the bio-/pathophysiological characteristics of the individual and for this study, the size of the biopsy (1cm) allowed for counting of 30 osteoblasts per biopsy.
Histological analysis of human biopsies and murine bone, spleen and liver
Bone marrow biopsies were fixed overnight in 10% neutral formalin solution, decalcified embedded in paraffin and sectioned at 5 mm per standard laboratory protocol. Sections were stained for b-catenin using a monoclonal antibody (1:1000, BD Transduction Lab) or for Runx2 using a polyclonal antibody (1:100 dilution, Santa Cruz) or for Hey1 using a polyclonal antibody (1:300 dilution, Abcam) on an automated Ventana Discovery XT (Tuscon, AZ) platform according to manufacturer's instructions. Immune complexes formed were developed using a DAB Map Kit (Ventana, Tuscon, AZ). Murine long bones, spleen and liver were collected from one month old mice, fixed overnight in 10% neutral formalin solution, embedded in paraffin, sectioned at 5 mm, and stained with haematoxylin and eosin (H&E). For immunohistochemistry, specimens were incubated with CD-117 (C-kit; Abcam), CD13 (Santa Cruz) or Myeloperoxidase (MPO) antibodies after an antigen retrieval step and blocking of endogenous peroxidase with 3% H2O2. Sections were then incubated with biotinylated secondary antibody and immune complexes formed were detected using standard Avidin Biotin complex method.
Statistical analysis
All data are represented as mean +- standard deviation. Statistical analyses were performed using a one-way ANOVA followed by Student-Newman-Keuls test and a p value less than 0.05 was considered significant. Time-to-event analysis was used to assess medium survival time to death. Kaplan-Meier curves were generated to illustrate time to death, stratified by group status. Statistical significance of the between-group difference in the median time-to-endpoint was assessed by the log-rank test. Statistical analyses were performed using XLSTAT (2012.6.02, Addinsoft) and SAS (version 9.2; SAS institute, Inc, Cary North Carolina). A p value less than 0.05 was considered statistically significant.

Supplementary Material
1
Supplementary Table 1. Nuclear accumulation of b-catenin in osteoblasts of 38.29% MDS/AML patients. b-catenin cellular localization in patients with MDS, AML, and AML arising from prior MDS with associated cytogenetic abnormalities. NL: normal cytogenetics; NE: cytogenetics non-evaluable; ND: cytogenetics not determined. Percentages in parentheses in the 4th column indicate percentages of osteoblasts with nuclear localization of b-catenin; Y denotes nuclear localization of b-catenin in osteoblasts and N denotes membrane localization of b -catenin in osteoblasts. In the latter samples nuclear localization of b-catenin was not detected in any of the osteoblasts.
