[Abstract, Methods, Methods, Mixed]

Distant Metastasis Occurs Late during the Genetic Evolution of Pancreatic Cancer. Summary Metastasis, the dissemination and growth of neoplastic cells in an organ distinct from that in which they originated 12, is the most common cause of death in cancer patients. This is particularly true for pancreatic cancers, where most patients are diagnosed with metastatic disease and few show a sustained response to chemo- or radiation therapy 3. Whether the dismal prognosis of patients with pancreatic cancer compared to patients with other types of cancer is a result of late diagnosis or early dissemination of disease to distant organs is not known. Here we rely on data generated by sequencing the genomes of seven pancreatic cancer metastases to evaluate the clonal relationships among primary and metastatic cancers. We find that clonal populations that give rise to distant metastases are represented within the primary carcinoma, but these clones are genetically evolved from the original parental, non-metastatic clone. Thus, genetic heterogeneity of metastases reflects that within the primary carcinoma. A quantitative analysis of the timing of the genetic evolution of pancreatic cancer was performed, indicating at least a decade between the occurrence of the initiating mutation and the birth of the parental, non-metastatic founder cell. At least five more years are required for the acquisition of metastatic ability and patients die an average of two years thereafter. These data provide novel insights into the genetic features underlying pancreatic cancer progression and define a broad time window of opportunity for early detection to prevent deaths from metastatic disease.

Methods Summary
Rapid autopsies were performed on seven individuals with Stage IV pancreatic cancer 13. Genomic DNA was extracted from cell lines or xenografts established from one metastasis of each patient and used for exomic sequencing as previously described 5. The Illumina Infinium II Whole Genome Genotyping Assay employing the BeadChip platform was also used to analyze each sample at 1,072,820 (1M) SNP loci as previously described 5. Samples of snap frozen pancreatic cancer tissue were microdissected using a PALM MicroLaser System (Carl Zeiss MicroImaging, Oberkochen, Germany) and DNA extracted using QIAmp DNA Micro Kits (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA). Genomic DNA was quantified by calculating long interspersed nuclear elements (LINE) by real-time PCR. Whole genome amplification (WGA) was performed using 10 ng total template DNA and an illustra GenomiPhi V2 DNA Amplification Kit (GE Healthcare, Piscataway, NJ, USA). Ki67 immunolabeling (Clone MIB-1, Dako Cytomation, Glostrup, Denmark) was performed on formalin fixed, paraffin embedded sections of normal pancreatic ducts and metastatic pancreatic cancer tissues for each patient using the Ventana Discovery staining system (Ventana Medical Systems, Tucson, AZ, USA), and this information used to inform computational models of the timing of clonal evolution of each patient's pancreatic cancer (full details of these models are available in Online Methods).

Methods
Patients and Tissue Samples
Tissue samples from 7 patients with pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma were collected in association with the Gastrointestinal Cancer Rapid Medical Donation Program (GICRMDP). This program was approved by the Johns Hopkins institutional review board and deemed in accordance with the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act. Details of the program have been described in detail previously 13. The tissue harvesting protocol consists of the following; after opening of the body cavity using standard techniques, the whole pancreas including the pancreatic cancer and each grossly identified metastasis were sampled using a sterile blade and forceps. The whole pancreas was sliced into 1 x 1 x 0.4 cm sections for overnight fixation in 10% buffered-formalin, for freezing in Tissue-Tek OCT compound (Sakura Finetechnical, Tokyo, Japan) in liquid nitrogen and for snap-freezing in liquid nitrogen in 1.7 mL cryovials and storage at -80degC. Xenograft enriched or low passage cell lines were generated from the post mortem cancer tissues of these seven patients as previously described 13,14.
Laser Capture Microdissection (LCM)
Frozen tissue sections of autopsy tissues were cut into 7 mm sections using a cryostat and embedded onto UV-treated PALM membrane slides (Carl Zeiss MicroImaging, Oberkochen, Germany) and the slides were stored immediately at -80 degC until subsequent fixation. Tissue sections that underwent LCM were defrosted, fixed in 100% methanol for 3 minutes, stained with toluidine blue before microdissection to remove contaminating stromal elements. Sections were dissected using a PALM MicroLaser System (Carl Zeiss MicroImaging). Dissected tissues were catapulted into adhesive caps. Generally, >20,000 cells were obtained from 5-10 serial sections by LCM in order to have obtain sufficient quantity and quality of genomic DNA for subsequent amplification and sequencing.
Genomic DNA Extraction and Whole Genome Amplification
Genomic DNA from microdissected tissues was extracted using QIAmp DNA Micro Kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer's protocol. Genomic DNA was quantified by calculating long interspersed nuclear elements (LINE) by real-time PCR. The LINE primer set 5'-AAAGCCGCTCAACTACATGG-3' (forward) and 5'-TGCTTTGAATGCGTCCCAGAG-3' (reverse) was designed. The real-time PCR condition was 95degC for 10 minutes; 40 cycles of 94degC for 10 seconds, 58degC for 15 seconds and 70degC for 30 seconds. PCR was carried out using Platinum SYBR Green qPCR SuperMix-UDG (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA). To minimize sequencing bias from using low starting templates, only samples for which the measured concentration by LINE assay was >=3.3 ng/ul (1000 genome equivalents) were used as a starting template for whole genome amplification (WGA). WGA was performed using 10 ng total template DNA and an illustra GenomiPhi V2 DNA Amplification Kit (GE Healthcare, Piscataway, NJ, USA), following the manufacturer's protocol. WGA products were purified using a Microspin G-50 system (GE Healthcare). The purified WGA products were quantified by NanoDrop spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) and diluted to 20 ng/mL for sequencing analysis. Using these methods and quality controls, there was complete concordance in the mutational signatures obtained of cultured cell lines/xenografts versus WGA materials prepared from their matched frozen tissues.
Sanger Sequencing
PCR amplification and sequencing was performed using the conditions and primers described by Jones et al. 5. A small number of sequencing reactions failed (<2% of the total reactions) and these corresponding genes were not included in progression models or quantitative time estimates of clonal evolution.
Genotyping
The Illumina Infinium II Whole Genome Genotyping Assay employing the BeadChip platform was used to analyze tumor samples at 1,072,820 (1M) SNP loci as previously described 5. Briefly, all SNP positions were based on the hg18 (NCBI Build 36, March 2006) version of the human genome reference sequence. The genotyping assay begins with hybridization to a 50 nucleotide oligonucleotide, followed by a two-color fluorescent single base extension. Fluorescence intensity image files were processed using Illumina BeadStation software to provide normalized intensity values and allelic frequency for each SNP position. For each SNP, the normalized experimental intensity value (R) was compared to the intensity values for that SNP from a training set of normal samples and represented as a ratio (called the "Log R Ratio") of log2 (Rexperimental/Rtraining set). For each SNP, the normalized allele intensity ratio (theta) was used to estimate a quantitative allelic frequency value (called the "B Allele Frequency") for that SNP 15. Using Illumina BeadStudio software, LogR Ratio and B Allele Frequency values were plotted along chromosomal coordinates and examined visually. Regions of loss of heterozygosity (LOH) were identified as genomic regions >2Mb with consecutive homozygous genotype calls (B Allele Frequency near 0 or 1). Smaller (<2Mb) regions of LOH were identified by requiring co-occurrence of decreased Log R Ratio scores in regions of consecutive homozygous genotype calls (B Allele Frequency near 0 or 1). Visual analysis of these data plotted along chromosomal coordinates was followed by manual analysis of the data for selected genes of interest.
Estimations of Proliferation Rates
To estimate the cell division rate, the Ki-67 labeling index (LI) in the proband lesion for each case was calculated. The Ki-67 LI on the pancreatic ducts in the histologically normal pancreas parenchyma was also calculated. Normal pancreas was collected from 2 autopsied patients who died of causes other than pancreatic cancer and 5 patients who underwent distal pancreatectomy for a serous cystadenoma or a islet cell tumor at The Johns Hopkins Hospital. Paraffin blocks were cut into sections 4 mm thick for Ki-67 immunostaining with all staining processes from deparaffinization to counterstaining with hematoxylin being performed automatically with the Ventana Discovery staining system (Ventana Medical Systems, Tucson, AZ). An anti-human Ki-67 mouse monoclonal antibody (Clone MIB-1, Dako Cytomation, Glostrup, Denmark) was used. At least 12 randomly selected high-power fields containing a minimum of 2000 cells were evaluated for each case, and the labeling index (LI) was calculated as the percentage of positive cell nuclei. Reactive small lymphocytes in each case were regarded as internal positive controls for Ki-67. Equal or more intense nuclear staining in comparison with the internal positive controls was considered to indicate positivity.
Modeling Tumor Evolution
Passenger mutations were defined as those unlikely to drive tumorigenesis. To be conservative, we considered passenger mutations as those not included as candidate cancer genes in a recent study based on whole exome sequencing of 24 pancreatic cancers 5. As the great majority of mutations identified in cancers are believed to be passengers, the results of the model are not highly dependent on the model used to estimate the relatively small number of drivers 16.
Because passenger mutations are neutral and do not affect the evolution in any way, they are accumulated independently in each cell lineage. Following the lineage of the founder cell of the parental clone back in time, we can assume that it acquired a new neutral mutation with rate r at each cell division, with r being the product of the mutation rate per base pair per cell division and the number of base pairs sequenced. The accumulation of neutral mutations in a cell lineage can be well-described by a Poisson process with rate r per cell division. We are interested in the number of cell divisions in the single lineage between tumor initiation and birth of the founder cell of the parental clone during which N1 passenger mutations accumulate. On the other hand, N1 is also the number of mutations that are found in all tumor samples from one patient. Since we sequenced at least one sample from the primary tumor and at least three samples from different metastases from each patient, these specific N1 mutations had to be present in the founder cells of all three metastases and in cells in the primary tumor. Thus there was a cell in the tumor that had these N1 specific mutations for the first time, and that is, by definition, the founder cell of the parental clone. Since we can neglect the accumulation of mutations before the onset of the tumor, these N1 mutations are accumulated along the single lineage from the tumor initiator cell to the founder cell of the parental clone. As the number of cell divisions between two subsequent mutations is distributed according to an exponential distribution with mean 1/r, the required number of cell divisions is the sum of N1 independent exponentially distributed random variables with mean 1/r, and is distributed according to a Gamma distribution with shape parameter N1 and scale parameter 1/r. The mean of this distribution is N1/r and the standard deviation is N1/r (see Supplementary Table 6). Since the number of base pairs sequenced in the study is 31.7*106, and the mutation rate per base pair per generation is estimated at 5*10-10, r = 31.7*106*5*10-10 [?] 0.016 per generation 8.
Using our measurements of Ki-67 labeling index of the 7 index lesions (average 16.3%), we were able to estimate the S-phase fraction of cells in the 7 index lesions (average LI=9.5%) 17. Assuming a median value for the S-phase duration in human tissues and tumors, Ts, of 10 hours 18, and using the formula for the potential cell doubling time Tpot=lTs/LI, we get an estimate for Tpot of 3.5 days. Here l is a correction factor for the non-linear age distribution of cells through the cell cycle, which was assumed to be 0.8 19. This estimate is consistent with the average cell doubling time in pancreatic cancer from Amikura et al. 20 of 2.3 days. We use this latter estimate in our analysis, as we believe it is more accurate for pancreatic cancer.
Amikura et al 20 also reported the median doubling time of pancreatic cancer metastases as 56 days. To estimate the age of the index metastasis, we used a two stage model. We estimated the tumor doubling time was equal to the cell doubling time (Tgen) until the tumor size reached 100 microns in diameter at which time angiogenesis is required 21. Thereafter, we used the median doubling time described above.
Our model works very well for estimating the number of cell divisions between discrete events in tumor evolution. In order to go from number of cell divisions to actual time we need to have an estimate for the average rate of cell division. The accuracy of our predictions regarding actual time therefore depends on the accuracy of that estimate. If we let Tgen denote the average time between subsequent cell divisions in a cell lineage, we arrive at the expression for time T1:
T1=Tgenr(N1+-N1).
We therefore estimate the number of cell divisions, and hence the time T1 between tumor initiation and birth of the founder cell of the parental clone to be proportional to the number of passenger mutations, N1, that the tumor acquired during that time. In our calculations, we use the estimate for cell doubling time in pancreatic cancer from the literature 20 as the value of Tgen.
T2 is determined analogously, with N2 defined as the number of passenger mutations present in the index lesion but not in the parental clone. T3 is determined from literature-based estimates of the tumor and cell doubling times, and the size of the index lesions at autopsy 20.

Supplementary Material
1
2
