[Abstract, Introduction, Methods, Results, Discussion, Mixed]

Selective ex-vivo photothermal ablation of human pancreatic cancer
                    with albumin functionalized multiwalled carbon nanotubes. The process of laser-mediated ablation of cancer cells marked with                     biofunctionalized carbon nanotubes is frequently called                     "nanophotothermolysis". We herein present a method of selective                     nanophotothermolisys of pancreatic cancer (PC) using multiwalled carbon                     nanotubes (MWCNTs) functionalized with human serum albumin (HSA). With the                     purpose of testing the therapeutic value of these nanobioconjugates, we have                     developed an ex-vivo experimental platform. Surgically resected specimens from                     patients with PC were preserved in a cold medium and kept alive via                     intra-arterial perfusion. Additionally, the HSA-MWCNTs have been                     intra-arterially administered in the greater pancreatic artery under ultrasound                     guidance. Confocal and transmission electron microscopy combined with                     immunohistochemical staining have confirmed the selective accumulation of                     HSA-MWCNTs inside the human PC tissue. The external laser irradiation of the                     specimen has significantly produced extensive necrosis of the malign tissue                     after the intra-arterial administration of HSA-MWCNTs, without any harmful                     effects on the surrounding healthy parenchyma. We have obtained a selective                     photothermal ablation of the malign tissue based on the selective                     internalization of MWCNTs with HSA cargo inside the pancreatic adenocarcinoma                     after the ex-vivo intra-arterial perfusion.

Introduction
Pancreatic cancer (PC) is the fourth leading cause of cancer death in the United
                States, with an overall 5-year survival rate of less than 5%.1 Only the surgical resection of the
                primary tumor provides clinical benefit and improvement in survival. However, this
                is rarely achieved in practice because, at the time of diagnosis, most PC patients
                have advanced-stage disease and experience various symptoms such as severe pain,
                jaundice, and weight loss. PC is also one of the most intrinsically drug-resistant
                of all tumors and the lack of effective cytostatics contributes to the increased
                mortality rates.2
The development of targeted therapy represents an exciting and new approach to PC
                treatment. Conceptually speaking, a targeted drug represents a responsive molecule
                attached to a delivery carrier with affinity for specific surface receptor proteins
                located in cell membranes.3 Being
                endowed with target specificity, the carrier has the ability to concentrate only on
                the desired biological area. The use of these biological carriers for the
                development of specific and sensitive site-targeted bionanosystems makes the
                selective internalization of molecules with photothermal properties in cancer cells
                possible. This internalization process is not possible under normal conditions.4
Studies suggest that nanotechnologies could play a major role in the development of
                new anticancer therapies.5 Thermal
                approach of nanoparticles, nanoemulsion, pH-responsive nanoparticles, nanoparticles
                used in combination with radiation and nanovectors for drug delivery are the most
                explored nanoparticle-based cancer treatment methods.6
Nanotechnology has already brought to light promising results in PC research and
                treatment. Gold nanoparticles were used to achieve a radiofrequency-mediated
                necrosis of PC cells.7 F19
                monoclonal antibodies conjugated to gold nanoparticles have demonstrated efficiency
                in targeting the pancreatic carcinoma tissue.8 Our previous work shows that carbon nanotubes (CNTs)
                alter the in-vitro molecular mechanisms of chemoresistance of PC cells.9
Highly proliferative tumor cells were shown to present intracytoplasmic albumin
                    deposits.10 Another study
                confirmed that malign tumors are able to internalize albumin through endocytosis
                which is further processed in lysosomes.11 The resulting amino acids are further used for the synthesis of
                various substrates needed for tumor growth.12,13 Based on these
                properties, the anticancer effect of albumin has been intensively studied. For
                instance, a combination of cytostatic drug and albumin called Trexall(tm) is
                currently prescribed for the treatment of metastatic PC in humans.14
The research mechanisms involving the selective tumor targeting of biofunctionalized
                CNTs are currently being intensely explored due to the impressive ability of CNTs to
                convert near-infrared (NIR) laser radiation into heat. This intrinsic property
                provides an opportunity to develop a new generation of immunoconjugates for cancer
                photo-therapy with high performance and efficacy in the selective thermal ablation
                of malignant cells.15 Although the
                idea and the principles of such bioconjugation hold a tremendous potential for the
                future, 100% selective internalization of nanobioconjugates in the cancer
                cells still remains problematic.16
                While progress has been made regarding biofunctionalization of CNTs using various
                biological molecules such as DNA, antibodies, folates, and growth factors,17-19 there is a significant lack of knowledge on how to
                obtain selectivity of these compounds for a single type of cancer cell. This is due
                to the simultaneous presence of the receptors used for the specific binding of the
                targeting molecules to the membranes of the noncancerous cells too, although in
                smaller amount compared with the cancer cells.20
Animal models of human cancer have been widely used for testing experimental cancer
                    nanotherapies.21 Despite their
                popularity, these models exhibit major flaws because human tumor cells undergo
                kinetic changes after transplantation, and passage in the nude mice and the majority
                of the xenografted human tumors do not maintain the morphological and biochemical
                characteristics of the original tumors.22 Therefore, this methodological gap between testing new cancer
                therapies in humans, on the one hand, and animal models, on the other hand, can be
                avoided using ex-vivo perfusion techniques of surgically resected organs under cold
                    storage.23
Considering these data and the important role of albumin in tumor metabolism, we have
                used human albumin bound to multiwalled CNTs (MWCNTs) for the selective targeting of
                PC cells. Since ethical limitations made the selectivity and therapeutic potential
                of these nanocompounds in patients impossible to test, we have designed an original
                model of living PC. We used ex-vivo-perfused pancreatic specimens that have been
                surgically removed from patients with ductal adenocarcinoma. On this model, the
                intra-arterial administration of albumin conjugated with MWCNTs specifically induced
                the release of this nanobioconjugate inside the malign tissue via the
                "capillary bed". We present herein data suggesting that extensive
                and selective tumoral necrosis was obtained when the living pancreas underwent laser
                irradiation after the administration of human serum albumin (HSA)-MWCNTs via the
                greater pancreatic artery.

Materials and methods
Antibodies and reagents
For the experiments involving the noncovalent functionalization of CNTs, MWCNTs
                    (>98% carbon basis, optical density [OD]
                    x internal diameter [ID] x L 10-15 nm
                    x 2-6 nm x 0.1-10.0 im; product number:
                    677248), HSA, and Sephacryl(tm) 100-HR were purchased from Sigma Chemical
                    Co (Deisenhofen, Germany), and all the other chemicals were purchased from Merck
                    (Darmstadt, Germany). For the experiments involving the biofunctionalization of
                    CNTs, pancreatic prelevation, and preservation we used Custodiol and Ringer
                    solutions purchased from Essential Pharmaceutics (Newtown, PA). For experiments
                    involving tissue viability, transferase dUTP nick end labeling (TUNEL) TMR Red
                    assay was purchased from Roche Applied Science (Indianapolis, IN). For
                    immunohistochemical staining, DRAQ5(tm) and
                    4',6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) were purchased from Sigma Chemical
                    Co. Polyclonal gp60 antibody (Ab) was prepared as previously described,24 and the fluorescent probe of
                    cy3 derivative of anti-gp60 was prepared according to the existing
                        protocol.25
Cell culture
PANC-1 cells (ATCC CRL 1649) were maintained in RPMI (Roswell Park Memorial
                    Institute) medium containing 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), at
                    37degC, in a humidified atmosphere. For the experiments, cells were
                    cultivated to confluence on 60 mm plates (BD Biosciences, Erembodegem,
                    Belgium).
Characterization of the cells
For the microscopy analysis, PANC-1 cells were trypsinized and transferred to 35
                    mm plates at a density of 25 x 104 cells/dish. The cells were
                    monitored by light microscopy (Olympus CKX 31, Munich, Germany).
Noncovalent functionalization of CNTs with HSA
MWCNTs (60 mg) were dispersed in a 3:1 (v/v) concentrated sulfuric and nitric
                    acid mixture, and sonicated three times for 10 seconds each with a tip
                    sonicator. Subsequently, the mixture was refluxed at 1200degC for 30
                    minutes. The oxidized MWCNTs treated in water solution were then centrifuged at
                    8000 rpm, to remove any large unreacted CNTs and metallic impurities from the
                    solution. Finally, the oxidized MWCNTs were vacuum filtered through a 0.2
                    mm polycarbonate filter (Whatman), until the elution was clear and had a
                    neutral pH. The filter cake was dried overnight at room temperature. After
                    filtration, the solution concentration was re-estimated using
                    ultraviolet-visible near-infrared (UV-Vis-NIR) spectroscopy (Jasco-V 530,
                    Gross-Umstadt, Germany). One milligram of fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC) (10
                    mg/mL in dimethyl sulfoxide) was mixed with 50 mg HSA in sodium buffer (20 mM,
                    pH 8.5), followed by incubation for 2 hours in darkness, at room temperature,
                    with continuous stirring. The HSA-FITC conjugate was purified by gel
                    chromatography, using a Sephacryl 100-HR column eluted with 10 mM phosphate
                    buffered saline (PBS).30
Oxidized MWCNTs and HSA-FITC were mixed with deionized water at a concentration
                    of 0.25 mg mL-1 and 1.25 mg mL-1,
                    respectively. The mixture was sonicated for 1 hour with a tip sonicator under
                    cooling in an ice bath, and then it was centrifuged for 5 minutes at 12000 rpm.
                    The solids settled at the bottom of the centrifuge tube and consisted of unbound
                    nanotubes, impurities, metals, and bundles of oxidized nanotubes. The resulting
                    supernatant was collected and subjected to a second round of centrifugation. The
                    collected supernatant contained the desired HSA-MWCNT conjugate.
Further, for a higher purification, the supernatant underwent gel chromatography
                    for the purification process. Sephacryl 100-HR that was presoaked and deaerated
                    using a vacuum pump was packed up to 15 cm in a 2.5 cm diameter x 24 cm
                    long glass column. The oxidized HSA-MWCNT supernatant recovered after
                    centrifugation was layered on top of the gel and eluted using gravity water
                    flow. Volume fractions were collected for 1-minute periods and analyzed for the
                    presence of MWCNTs and HSA by measuring the absorbance at 500 and 280 nm,
                    respectively, using the spectrophotometer (Jasco V530, Gross-Umstadt, Germany).
                    Fractions with protein content were pooled for further use.26
Immunochemical experiments
For experiments describing the selective internalization of HSA-MWCNT conjugates
                    in PC cells via GP60 receptors (Figure
                        1), we have used freshly plated PANC-1 cells adhering to glass
                    coverslips. By means of temperature-sensitive activation, PANC-1 cells have been
                    exposed to cold (4degC) incubation for 60 minutes, in 5 mg HBSS
                    (Hanks' balanced salt solution), mixed with cy3-labeled anti-gp60 Ab.
                    Unlabeled anti-gp60 Ab were included in the incubation mixture at a 10-fold
                    molar excess (5 mg/mL) to prevent nonspecific adsorption of the
                    fluorescent probe. The cells were washed twice with MWCNTs functionalized with
                    HSA-FITC (50 mg/L) at 4degC. Then, the cells were rewarmed to
                    37degC for 15 minutes, allowing the occurrence of antibody
                    internalization. In order to remove the antibody adhering to the cell surface,
                    the cells were further washed three times at 1-minute intervals with cold
                    (4degC) acetate buffer (100 mM NaCl, 50 mM sodium acetate, pH 5.0). The
                    cells immediately returned to 50 mg/L FITC-HSA-MWCNTs (pH 7.4). The coverslips
                    were then transferred to the stage of a fluorescent microscope and examined for
                    Cy3-labeled internalization.
Fluorescent staining procedures were performed in accordance with the
                    manufacturer's protocol for each dye. Fluorescent images were acquired
                    using a Zeiss LSM 710 confocal laser scanning unit equipped with argon and a
                    HeNe laser mounted on a Axio Observer Z1 inverted microscope using 364, 488, and
                    568 nm excitation laser lines to detect DRAQ5 (BP590-650 nm emission),
                    DAPI (BP385-470 nm emission), fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)
                    (BP505-550 emission), and Cy3 fluorescence (LP585 emission),
                    respectively.
PC harvesting
Six patients diagnosed with adenocarcinoma of the body of pancreas were referred
                    to the 3rd Surgery Clinic, Cluj-Napoca, Romania, for surgical treatment. In view
                    of a localized pancreatic neoplasm, surgical removal of the tumor was planned
                    for each patient. Each pancreatic tumor was found by palpation on the left side
                    of the portal vein during laparotomy. This was confirmed by intraoperative
                    ultrasonography, which showed hypoechogenic, well defined tumors, located
                    between the isthmus and the corpus of the pancreas. The other parts of the
                    pancreas appeared to be normal. Left splenopancreatectomy (distal pancreatectomy
                    and splenectomy) with splenic, celiac, and hepatic lymphadenectomy was performed
                    after the intraoperative identification and preparation of the splenic artery
                    and vein.
Pancreas preservation
Each specimen (the body and tail of the pancreas and the spleen) was transported
                    in a sterile bag containing Custodiol solution, sealed with an adhesive strip,
                    and placed in a second container which was also filled with Custodiol perfusion
                    solution in order to avoid any failure of cooling by trapped air. Each specimen
                    was safety ensured by the double packing, placed in a sterile plastic container,
                    and the lid securely closed. The plastic container was further placed in a
                    cooling box containing ice for the transportation from the surgery room to the
                    laboratory.
Further, each specimen was immersed in a water bath for accurate temperature
                    control at 5.5degC, filled with lactated Ringer's solution (a
                    crystalloid solution with a composition physiologically closer to that of plasma
                    than 0.9% saline).
Custodiol solution, used for perfusion and flushing of donor pancreas in
                    transplantology, was perfused through an appropriately prepared air-free
                    perfusion tube system into the splenic artery located in the upper edge of the
                    pancreas (at a flow rate of 1.5 mL per minute and per gram - the
                    estimated weight of the specimen was between 80 and 110 g).
Separately, 50 mL of HSA-MWCNT solution (200 mg/L) diluted with 50 mL Custodiol
                    was administered by gravity perfusion (the container was placed 1 m above the
                    level of the bath, the perfusion rate flow was of 0.5 mL/s) in the greater
                    pancreatic artery (a blood vessel that arises from splenic artery), under
                    Doppler ultrasound guidance (Figure
                        2), to safely allow the flushing of the pancreatic "capillary
                    bed" with HSA-MWCNT solution.
The length of the ex-vivo experiment was of about 5 hours for each specimen, much
                    less than the maximum time recommended (12-15 hours) for the
                    preservation of the living pancreas during transplantation.27
Laser irradiation
A diode laser was fixed above the organ bath in a permanent position while the
                    living pancreas was being kept immersed and perfused, as shown in Figure 2B. For the laser
                    positioning above the malign lesion, ex-vivo ultrasound was performed on the
                    surgical specimen. Thus, the laser diode was vertically placed 1 cm above the
                    edge of the pancreas (1-3 cm above the hypoechogenic image inside the
                    pancreatic parenchyma, depending on the morphological particularity of each
                    laser-treated specimen). We irradiated the pancreatic parenchyma containing the
                    tumor mass for 30 minutes, using a 5 W/cm2, 808 nm continuous laser
                    generator (Apel Laser, Bucharest), in combination with the continuous
                    intra-arterial administration of HSA-MWCNT-Custodiol solution.
Measurement of heat shock protein (HSP) expression
Specimens from various areas (both tumor and healthy tissue) were harvested after
                    combined intra-arterial administration and external laser irradiation, and
                    embedded in OCT cryomatrix (Sakura Finetek). Fluorescence immunostaining was
                    performed on several sections for the measurement of HSP27 (green fluorescence)
                    and HSP90 (red fluorescence) expression.
Tissue staining and imaging
For this purpose, multiple tissue samples were extracted from each region and
                    from each surgical specimen, under ultrasound guidance. Thus, biopsy samples
                    before, during, and after irradiation and treatment with HSA-MWCNTs were
                    obtained from the tumor (central and peripheral area) and from the surrounding
                    pancreatic tissue (5-10 mm outside the gross margins of the tumor),
                    using TruCut needle (Dyna Medical, ON, Canada) biopsy.
Biopsies were immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen, stored at
                    -70degC, and sectioned at 7 mm with a Leica RM 2125 RT
                    microtome (Wetzlar, Germany).
For the common histopathologic analysis, tissue specimens harvested from the
                    tumor mass and the surrounding areas were immersed in 4% formaldehyde
                    solution, after the photothermal treatment. The tissues were embedded in
                    paraffin wax, serially sectioned, and stained with hematoxylin and eosin.
                    Typical morphological characteristics were examined under light microscope.
                    Thermal injury was assessed in sections using a semiquantitative scale, with a
                    necrotic area percentage of 0 = normal; 1 =
                    <10%; 2 = 10%-50%; 3 =
                    50%-75%; 4 = >75%. Light
                    microscopy analysis was performed using an Olympus BX60 microscope (Hamburger,
                    Germany).
Electron microscopic observation
Biopsies specimens were extracted from several parts of the tumor and routinely
                    prepared on 0.05 mm thin slides, monitoring the changes in the malignant
                    tissue's ultrastructural morphology, using a Jeol JEM 1010 transmission
                    electron microscope (Jeol, Tokyo, Japan). The images were captured using a Mega
                    VIEW III camera (Olympus, Soft Imaging System, Munster, Germany).
Temperature measurements
To characterize the baseline conditions and parameters for the proposed treatment
                    method, continuous remote multithermometer reading was conducted in both the
                    healthy and tumor tissue during the treatment, using a fast response Therma 20
                    handheld thermometer (Electronic Temperature Instruments, Worthing, UK),
                    equipped with stainless steel, fast response, needle penetration probe. The
                    thermistor probes were positioned inside the healthy or tumor tissue under
                    ultrasound guidance.
Statistical methods
The continuous data was tested for normality (Kolmogorov-Smirnov test)
                    before the hypothesis testing. The longitudinal data, representing repetitive
                    measurements of the same parameter during the follow-up interval, were analyzed
                    through the construction of kinetic curve along with the area under the curve
                    (AUC) calculus. Consecutively, kinetic curves of two different groups were
                    compared using Mann-Whitney U test. Fisher's
                    exact test was used for qualitative data correlations. For all tests, a 0.05
                    threshold was selected for statistical significance. Statistical data analysis
                    was performed using SPSS 17.0 software (Chicago, IL).

Results and discussion
Functionalization of MWCNTs with HSA
To obtain a targeted delivery of MWCNTs directly into the cancer cells, and to
                    visualize and detect the localization of the nanotubes inside the cells,
                    HSA-FITC was used and noncovalently labeled onto the oxidized surface of
                    MWNTs.
Confocal microscopy has been proposed to identify fluorescein isothiocyanate
                    (FITC) labeled CNTs in solution and to provide clues regarding the
                    successfulness of noncovalent functionalization of MWCNTs with HSA-FITC. As
                    shown in Figure 3C, globular
                    green MWCNTs, corresponding to large molecules of fluorescent albumin, were
                    observed.
The oxidation of the nanotubes using a 3:1 (v/v) mixture of concentrated sulfuric
                    and nitric acid gives them hydrophilicity and stability in aqueous systems due
                    to the formation of -COOH, OH groups at the end of and along the
                    sidewalls of the tubes.28
Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectra from Figure 4A confirms successful oxidation. By
                    comparing the FTIR spectra of pristine MWCNTs (black) with the oxidized-MWCNTs
                    (red), the characteristic bands of the oxygen-containing groups appear at 3422
                        cm-1, corresponding to the O-H stretching
                        vibration,29 a week band at
                    1721 cm-1, corresponding to the carbonyl and carboxyl
                    C-O stretching vibration, at 1582 and 1380 cm-1,
                    corresponding to the O-H deformation vibration, and at 1117
                        cm-1, corresponding to the C-O stretching
                    vibration. The band at 620 cm-1 corresponds to the C-O
                    out-of-plane deformation.30
Further, we have noncovalently conjugated HSA-FITC on the surface of oxidized
                    MWCNTs. Firstly, we have covalently labeled HSA with FITC at an increased pH
                    (above pH = 9), as schematically shown in Figure 3A. FITC has covalently attached to the
                    protein through the alpha-amino group. Secondly, HSA-FITC complex has been
                    adsorbed onto the nanotubes, presumably through electrostatic interactions
                    between the functional groups of MWCNTs and the protein-positive domains (Figure 3B). Taking into
                    consideration the fact that not all the surface of the nanotubes is oxidized,
                    hydrophobic interactions can also occur.
UV-Vis spectroscopy is a simple but efficacious method which confirms the
                    formation of the oxidized MWCNT-HSA-FITC complex. The nanotube solutions give an
                    adsorbtion band at 295.7 nm, which corresponds to the +/-plasmon
                    transition of MWCNTs.31
The yellowish HSA-FITC solution has the characteristic adsorbtion band at 489 nm
                    and a second adsorbtion at 292 nm, which suggests the existence of aromatic
                    amino acids of HSA. Comparing the above mentioned spectra, the formation of the
                    MWCNT-HSA-FITC complex becomes obvious due to the appearance of oxidized-MWCNT
                    band and HSA-FITC band at 475.6 nm, which is shifted and has low intensity
                        (Figure 4C).
The conjugation of HSA-FITC onto the nanotube surface is also confirmed by FTIR
                    spectroscopy as seen in Figure
                    4B. No similarity can be observed when comparing the spectra of HSA-FITC
                    with that of the nanotube-conjugated HSA-FITC. All the corresponding peaks had
                    shifted their position, and some of them even disappeared. In the higher region,
                    the stretching vibration band of the N-H groups at 3409
                        cm-1 changed their shape in a broad band that included
                    two peaks: one at 3389 cm-1 (N-H groups stretching
                    vibration) and the second at 3303 cm-1, which is the pyridine
                    aromatic C-H stretching vibration band. The aliphatic C-H
                    stretching vibration band at 2929 and 2873 cm-1 moved to 2922
                    and 2865 cm-1, showing that these groups are involved in
                    electrostatic bonds. Amide I and II are also shifted to low frequency: amide I
                    from 1656 to 1649 cm-1, amide II from 1544 to 1532
                        cm-1. The CH3 asymmetric and symmetric deformation
                    changed their band from 1459 to 1447 cm-1, and from 1416 to
                    1389 cm-1. The region in between dramatically changed their
                    intensity. This is due to the spontaneous adsorbtion of the crystalline HSA-FITC
                    complex onto the MWCNTs and the formation of a well organized oxidized
                    MWCNT-HSA-FITC.
Furthermore, atomic force microscopy (AFM) analysis of the HSA-MWCNT solution was
                    performed. A representative AFM evidence of the successful attachment of HSA
                    molecules onto the surface of the nanotubes is shown in Figure 3D. AFM allowed the analysis at the
                    nanometric scale of the two HSA molecules (black arrows in Figure 3D) attached to the end of the nanotubes
                    (white arrows). A single HSA molecule (red arrow) has been also observed in the
                    topographic image shown. The length of the CNTs was estimated as being lower
                    than 200 nm. The lateral resolution of an AFM image is determined by the tip of
                    the object that is imaged. In the presented image, the width of the nanotube
                    appears to be greater than 2 nm, as we used an AFM tip having a ~15 nm
                    radius of curvature.
Ex-vivo testing procedure
The main goal of this investigation was to develop and test a new method of
                    treatment of human pancreatic adenocarcinoma. Preliminary literature data
                    supports the involvement of albumin in tumor growth. In the present study, we
                    tested a carrier-linked CNT system based on HSA for the selective delivery and
                    laser mediated ex-vivo ablation of living human PC tissue (Figures 2A and 2B).
The central hypothesis of the study was that albumin will carry the MWCNTs inside
                    the tumor tissue after intra-arterial perfusion. To test this hypothesis, we
                    developed an experimental platform using viable resected specimens from patients
                    who underwent curative treatment of PC.
Despite their attractiveness in nanomedicine, in-vitro test conditions cannot
                    duplicate the host environment due to the variability of the testing media (eg,
                    acidic versus alkaline, differences in cation content), and exhibit limiting
                    effect of protein binding on cell surface receptors.32 Moreover, the controlled conditions present in
                    in-vitro biosystems are significantly different from those in vivo, and
                    properties of nanoparticles such as high adsorption capacity, hydrophobicity,
                    surface charge, optical and magnetic properties, or catalytic activity may be
                        modified.33
On the other hand, obvious potential pitfalls of nanophotothermolysis experiments
                    on mice models are represented by the morphology and size of the tumor, which
                    are fundamentally different than that of human tumors. Thus, all the
                    particularities of human tumors such as vessel anatomy and distribution, and
                    volume and location, are not comparable to these models.
Cytotoxicity induced by laser irradiation or internalization of
                    HSA-MWCNTs
To avoid a potential bias, we investigated the possible necrotic effect of simple
                    laser irradiation. For this purpose, using fine needle biopsy, we extracted
                    tumor samples before and after irradiation, without HSA-MWCNTs. As shown in
                        Figures 5A and 5B, no differences regarding size
                    and shape, nuclear modifications or necrosis, were observed at the
                    histopathological analysis of the specimens, before and after irradiation. For
                    similar reasons, we analyzed tumor specimens after the simple internalization of
                    HSA-MWCNTs. As shown in Figure
                    5C, no morphological changes were noticed in the extracted samples after
                    administration.
In addition, terminal TUNEL assay was performed, suggesting that there was no
                    difference regarding the apoptotic rate among the examined tissues (data not
                    shown).
Internalization of CNTs
The ability of FITC-labeled bioconjugate of HSA-MWCNTs to internalize inside the
                    tumor cells after administration via vascular supply has been assessed by
                    confocal fluorescence and electron microscopy imaging.
The area with the highest concentration of HSA-MWCNTs was observed in the central
                    part of the tumor, where most of the malignant cells were stained with
                    fluorescent dye (Figure 6C). The
                    malignant tissue extracted from the periphery of the tumor also presented
                    intracytoplasmic MWCNT-HSA-FITC. However, a lower density of fluorescent
                    nanotubes was noted compared with the central region of the tumor (Figure 6B). No fluorescence was
                    observed outside the tumor in the surrounding healthy parenchyma (Figure 6A). Thus, we have provided
                    imagistic evidence that HSA can act as delivery carrier of MWCNTs, and because
                    we were unable to identify any fluorescence in the healthy pancreatic tissue, we
                    reasoned that the HSA-MWCNT bioconjugates exhibit 100% affinity for
                    ductal adenocarcinoma cells. These data support on the one hand the involvement
                    of the vascular architecture of the malignant lesion tributary to pancreatic
                    magna artery and on the other hand the specificity of HSA for cell receptors in
                    the selective internalization of HSA-MWCNTs.
Moreover, electron microscopy of the tissue after treatment showed necrotic
                    features with disintegrated nuclei, and intracellular clusters of MWCNTs,
                    suggesting the efficacy of nanophotothermal ablation.
The mechanism of selective internalization of HSA-MWCNTs inside the malignant
                    pancreatic cells
To shed light on the molecular mechanisms involved in the specific
                    internalization of HSA-MWCNTs in the pancreatic malignant cells, we investigated
                    the possibility that a 60 kDa glycoprotein, gp60, which is known to function in
                    albumin transcytosis in malignant cells,34 was involved in the selective internalization
                    of albumin bound to CNTs. To accomplish this, we let the cells treated with 5
                    mg/L HSA-MWCNTs for 1 hour incorporate cy3-anti-gp60 antibody for 30
                    minutes at 37degC. Therefore, we obtained fluorescent images proving the
                    internalized cy3 fluorescence (Figure
                        1B).
Alternatively, we showed that PANC-1 cells internalized albumin-bound MWCNTs
                    (fluorescently labeled with FITC) that were distributed into the punctate
                    structure inside the cells (Figure
                        1A). DAPI, which is known to form fluorescent complexes with natural
                    double-stranded DNA, was used for nuclei staining. In Figure 1C, a nearly complete co-localization of
                    the FITC fluorescence (green image) and cy3 fluorescence (red image) was
                    emphasized by the yellow color in the merged image. This finding suggests that
                    albumin-bound MWCNTs were incorporated into the plasmalemmal vesicles containing
                    gp60 as a membrane protein, further validating HSA-MWCNT specificity for gp60
                    receptors. Therefore, based on this data, we showed that HSA-MWCNTs can act as
                    specific and sensitive site-targeted nanosystems against gp60 receptors located
                    on the PC cell membranes.
Very recent clinical trials suggest that specific targeting of GP60 (albondin)
                    receptor with Abraxane (Celgene, Summit, USA), a cytostatic drug called
                    paclitaxel bound to human albumin may prolong the survival in advanced cases of
                        PC.35 For the first time,
                    the results of this study demonstrate that HSA-MWCNTs exploit the albondin
                    receptor, in a similar manner, penetrating the blood-stroma barrier with
                    consequent delivery of active nanomaterial inside the malignant cells (Figure 7).
Temperature measurements
Laser irradiation of cancer cells labeled with HSA-MWCNTs may be used in two
                    modes: pulse and continuous. The pulse mode produces localized (few micrometers)
                    damage of individual cancer cells by laser-induced micro- and nano-bubbles
                    around overheated nanoparticles, without harmful effects on the surrounding
                    healthy cells. It particularly favors in-vivo destruction of single circulating
                    tumor cells only by using nanosecond laser pulses. The second mode is more time
                    consuming (a few minutes of exposure) and has the thermal denaturation and
                    coagulation effects as main mechanisms of cell damage. It is more appropriate to
                    treat primary tumors with sizes of several millimeters.36 Based on these data, we used continuous laser
                    to irradiate the tumor after the internalization of HSA-MWCNTs.
There was no difference in tissue temperature among the three areas measured at
                    baseline (Figure 8): 1) the
                    central region of the tumoral mass; 2) the peripheral region, 2-5 mm
                    away from the edge of the hypoechogenic tumor mass; and 3) the healthy
                    pancreatic tissue surrounding the tumor. Statistical analysis of the maximal
                    tissue temperature among the three areas revealed that the heating curves of the
                    area under the curve (AUC) corresponding to the central and peripheral regions
                    of the tumor were significantly higher (P > 0.05) than
                    the heating curves obtained from the temperature measurements in the pancreatic
                    tissue. This indicates that the heating process following the irradiation and
                    HSA-MWCNT treatment mainly occurred in the tumor mass. As shown in Figure 8B the maximal tissue
                    temperatures (4.2degC in the surrounding healthy tissue; 25.6degC at
                    the periphery of the tumor; 29.3degC in the central region of the tumor)
                    were approximately achieved after 20 minutes of irradiation combined with the
                    simultaneous administration of HSA-MWCNTs. The findings in Figure 8 demonstrate that after 20 minutes of
                    laser irradiation combined with ex-vivo intra-arterial administration, the
                    temperature elevations in the tumor tissue are high enough to produce extensive
                    necrosis of the tumor compared with the harmless effects on the healthy
                    parenchyma. In a separate experiment, 200 mg/L of highly purified solution of
                    unconjugated MWCNTs were simultaneously administered in combination with
                    external laser irradiation. Temperature measurements displayed a maximal
                    increase (delta t = 16.6degC) in the superficial pancreatic tissue
                    above the tumor (closest to the laser diode). Moreover, the temperature
                    magnitude at the periphery of the tumor closest to the laser beam was of only
                    9.7degC, while in the middle and distant margins of tumor the increase was
                    of only 6.2degC and 4.5degC respectively. These changes were further
                    confirmed by the histopathological analysis displaying extensive necrotic areas
                    in the healthy tissue located in the vicinity of the laser diode, as suggested
                    by the histological scores (Figure
                        9E). Thus, we obtained evidence that ex-vivo intra-arterial
                    administration of highly purified unconjugated MWCNTs is tributary to the
                    architecture of the capillary bed inside the pancreatic parenchyma, further
                    demonstrating the nonselective distribution of the nanomaterial inside the
                    pancreatic tissue (both healthy and malignant).
Remote thermistors may be independently placed inside the tissue, and can measure
                    intraprocedural tissue temperatures. In the present study, the CNT mediated
                    thermal activation of tissues was similar to that reported by other papers.37
HSP response to MWCNT-mediated photothermal therapy
To confirm the results mentioned above, we have used an independent measure of
                    heat generation: induction of HSPs, which are induced by elevated temperatures
                    and serve as endogenous cellular markers of thermal stress. As seen in Figure 8A, minimal expression
                    exists for all HSPs in the surrounding tissue, after treatment. Maximal HSP27
                    and HSP90 expression were induced in the tumor tissue.
Assessment of tumor necrosis after laser treatment and internalization of
                    HSA-MWCNTs
In the present study, we have used MWCNTs as heat inducing agents under laser
                    radiation, in order to obtain a selective necrosis of the malignant lesion. This
                    method is based on the presence and clustering of MWCNTs inside the targeted
                    cells. Their highly optical absorption capacity is responsible for inducing
                    thermal effects under NIR irradiation, where the biological systems have low
                    absorption and high transparency.38 The optoelectronic transitions in the graphitic structures of the
                    MWCNT clusters generate thermal energy39 that rapidly diffuses into the subcellular compartments where the
                    nanobioconjugates are present.
In this ex-vivo experiment, the pancreas was preserved in crystalloid perfusion
                    combined with cold storage. Simultaneously, HSA molecules bound to MWCNTs were
                    directly perfused in the greater pancreatic artery under ultrasound guidance.
                    The next step was to irradiate the hypoechogenic tumor mass.
After combined irradiation and intra-arterial perfusion of HSA-MWCNTs, all
                    sections were evaluated in detail for any cell shape changes (cell shrinkage,
                    extraordinary cytoplasmic eosinophilia, clear cell change, cytoplasmic
                    vacuolization), nuclear changes (nucleomegaly, multinucleation, hyper-chromasia,
                    symplastic changes), and coagulative necrosis. The histopathological examination
                    clearly revealed foci with sizes ranging from 500 mm to a few
                    millimeters, with common signs of thermal cell necrosis, present in all the
                    examined malignant slides in the entire tumor mass, mostly in its central
                    area.
A representative histopathological image of such necrosis is shown in Figure 9C: the malignant cells are
                    shrunken, with loss of contact, eosinophilic cytoplasm and nuclear damage
                    (pyknotic and fragmentized nuclei). The apoptotic bodies were present (Figure 9B). At the same time as the
                    destruction of the tumor cells, thermal injury was observed in the stromal
                    reactive tissue. Both the extracellular matrix and the cellular components of
                    the desmoplastic reaction were affected. As shown in Figure 9B, the connective tissue surrounding the
                    tumor cells was disrupted (oedematous), with fragmented, acidophilic collagen
                    fibers. Some foci revealed hydropic degeneration, with cell ballooning due to
                    intracitoplasmatic vacuolization of the tumor cells (Figure 9B). Due to the impaired staining
                    characteristics, no clear demarcation between the viable and necrotic cells was
                    observed. Figure 9D shows few
                    areas of preserved tumoral architecture, with tumoral and glandular structures
                    lined by mucus-secreting columnar cells alternating with thermally damaged,
                    shrunken cells. No morphologic changes were noticed during the histopathological
                    analysis of the samples extracted from the pancreatic tissue surrounding the
                    tumor. Figure 9A illustrates the
                    histological characteristics of this tissue after photothermal treatment. Normal
                    pancreatic structure with secretory units or acini consisting of a single layer
                    of pyramidal cells, surrounded by connective tissue, Langerhans islets and
                    pancreatic ducts could be observed. These findings were additionally confirmed
                    by electron microscopy analysis.
Histological scoring indicated that pancreatic damage was more pronounced in
                    malign tissue after treatment. As seen in Figure 9E, overall histological scores showed a
                    marked increase in malign cell death (where necrotic areas were more than
                    50%, on all the examined slides), whereas necrotic cells were observed
                    only sporadically in tissue obtained from healthy, surrounding parenchyma. For
                    control solution, tissue disruption and cell death was observed predominantly in
                    the surrounding tissue. These data, together with the observation of massive
                    HSA-MWCNT accumulation in the tumor tissue, suggest that the combination of
                    HSA-MWCNTs and laser irradiation produces selective necrosis of human PC.
To investigate the selectivity and efficacy of the proposed treatment, terminal
                    TUNEL assay was performed in order to stain the necrotic nuclei of apoptotic
                    cells on the examined slides. As seen in Figures 10A-10C, based on this method, we
                    obtained strong imaging evidence that more than 95% of the tumor cells
                    were apoptotic after irradiation. On the other hand, the apoptotic rate of the
                    surrounding healthy cells was less than 2% (Figures 10D-10F) on all the examined
                    slides (P < 0.0001). These observations strongly
                    suggest the specific nature of our treatment and confirmed its efficacy in
                    inducing selective apoptosis in human pancreatic adenocarcinoma.
The hallmark of cell lysis is represented by DNA degradation, which in the early
                    stages is selective to the internucleosomal DNA linker regions. The DNA cleavage
                    may yield double-stranded and single-stranded DNA breaks (nicks). Both types of
                    breaks can be detected by labeling the free 3'-OH termini with
                    modified nucleotides such as fluorescein-dUTP in an enzymatic reaction. The
                    terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase (TdT) catalyzes the template-independent
                    polymerization of deoxyribonucleotides to the 3'-end of single- and
                    double-stranded DNA. This method is recognized for its high sensitivity and
                    specificity for apoptotic cell detection in tissue sections.40 This selective destruction of
                    the tumor tissue has additionally confirmed the efficacy of the selective
                    internalization of MWCNTs, with HSA cargo, inside the ductal pancreatic
                    adenocarcinoma after intra-arterial perfusion.
According to the information provided by the remote temperature measurements, in
                    the present study, the HSA-MWCNT-mediated heating was tumor-specific, and
                    consequently, the risk of damaging collateral structures was insignificant.
                    Therefore, a clinical development of such treatment would have great
                    benefit.
If we dissect the molecular detail of the HSA-MWCNT-mediated laser ablation
                    mechanism, we obtain a selective necrosis of each malignant cell at a
                    micrometric scale, with consequent global tumor involution. This is of decisive
                    importance since all the current thermal ablation techniques in surgery rely on
                    the use of invasive electrodes that generate high local temperature
                    (90degC), with nonselective carbonization of the tissue. Therefore,
                    methods such as radiofrequency or ultrasound ablation are not used in pancreatic
                    surgery (they have limited applications in liver and kidney tumor
                        treatment).41 Due to the
                    burning effects on the tissue, complications of these techniques in surgical
                    practice, such as the extensive destruction of normal tissue with organ failure,
                    residual abscesses, vascular injuries and peritoneal hemorrhage, neoplastic
                    seeding, and intestinal perforation, are quite common.42
The spread of PC cells in the systemic circulation, with consequent seeding in
                    other organs, a process called metastasis, is the cause of most PC-related
                    deaths. Thus, the development of selective targeted therapies able to destroy
                    these circulating cells could open a new era in the treatment of PC. Therefore,
                    there is a dire need for innovations of such molecular "Trojan
                    horses", able to produce safe single-cell necrosis, with minimal side
                    effects.
In this experiment, all the existent situations met in surgical practice were
                    replicated. We reasoned that, from a surgical point of view, the ultrasound
                    identification of the tumor and its vascular supply, the intra-arterial
                    administration of the functionalized MWCNTs, as well as the external laser
                    irradiation, could all be safely achieved in patients by means of minimally
                    invasive surgery, with major benefits for the patient (eg, laparoscopic approach
                    or percutaneous approach under ultrasound/CT guidance).

Conclusion
We showed for the first time that HSA-MWCNTs are selectively internalized in human
                pancreatic adenocarcinoma cells through the binding of albumin carrier to the gp60
                receptor. Moreover, to our best knowledge, this is the first demonstration of the
                therapeutic potential of intra-arterially delivered nanobioconjugates in living
                human tumors. This is of decisive importance, especially with regard to the
                initiation of this therapeutic method in clinical trials. The proposed ex-vivo
                platform could be further used for the development and testing of new
                nanobioconjugates with specificity for PC. Thus, starting from this model, other
                ex-vivo platforms (eg, human hepatocellular carcinoma, kidney tumors) can be built,
                with the purpose of testing new active nanobiomolecules against human cancers.
The above results assign human albumin as having a good potential for use as a
                selective delivery carrier for the development of CNT-based targeting agents in the
                treatment of PC. This original therapeutic strategy (intra-arterial administration
                of nanobiosystems in living human organs) presented in this paper will likely
                increase the knowledge of CNT-mediated photothermal therapy in cancer and will open
                new doors in oncological research. Nevertheless, further research is required for
                the careful assessment of unexpected toxicities and biological interactions of
                HSA-MWCNTs inside the living organism.

Ethical considerations
The authors state that they have obtained appropriate institutional review board
                approval (decision number 7699/17.05.2010) and have followed the principles outlined
                in the Declaration of Helsinki for all human experimental investigations. For
                research regarding surgically resected specimens, informed consent has been obtained
                from the participants involved, and the experiments were tailored so that the future
                outcome or further therapeutic strategy would not affect these patients.
