[Abstract, Introduction, Mixed, Mixed, Mixed, Mixed, Mixed, Mixed]

The role of inflammatory cells in fostering pancreatic cancer cell growth and
invasion. The pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) microenvironment accommodates a variety of cell types and a plethora of complex interactions between tumor cells, host cells and extracellular matrix (ECM) components. Here we review the role of inflammatory cells, in particular mast cells, myeloid-derived suppressor cells, macrophages, T regulatory cells, T helper cells and neutrophils. The picture that emerges is that of a tumor microenvironment, in which the immune response is actively suppressed, and inflammatory cells contribute in a variety of ways to tumor progression.

Introduction
The presence of dense desmoplastic stroma is one of the defining characteristics of PDAC
(Neesse et al., 2010). PDAC stroma consists of
mesenchymal cells such as fibroblasts and pancreatic stellate cells (PSCs); ECM proteins
including proteoglycans, fibronectin, and collagens I and III; peri-tumoral nerve fibers;
endothelial cells and cells of the immune system (Korc, 2007; Farrow et al., 2008). The resulting
microenvironment contributes to cancer initiation, tumor progression (Hwang et al., 2008; Vonlaufen et al., 2008; Whiteside, 2008; Polyak et al., 2009) and chemoresistance (Olive et al., 2009; Grippo and Tuveson, 2010).
Inflammatory cells have been linked to tumor development and progression through their
mediation of the inflammatory response critical for tumor formation from precancerous
lesions (de Visser et al., 2006). In the case of
PDAC, a notably higher incidence of cancer is found in patients with the inflammatory
condition, chronic pancreatitis (CP; Lowenfels et al., 1993; McKay et al., 2008). Moreover for
individuals with hereditary pancreatitis, the cumulative lifetime risk (to 70 years of age)
of pancreatic cancer is very high, at 40 (Vitone et al., 2005). In genetically modified mouse models of PDAC, cerulein-induced pancreatitis
is known to accelerate the development of PDAC (Guerra et al., 2007, 2011; Morris et al., 2010). Moreover, pancreatitis may also hasten the process
of metastasis (Rhim et al., 2012). Using a mouse
model of pancreatic cancer in which pancreatic epithelial cells could be tracked, Rhim et
al. (2012) recently made the surprising observation
that pancreatic cells, in the early stages of transformation, entered the bloodstream.
Interestingly, the number of circulating pancreatic cells was increased in mice following
the induction of pancreatitis, and treatment with the anti-inflammatory, dexamethasone,
blocked dissemination.
The relationship between tumor cells and the immune system is complex. Infiltrations of
cells from both the innate and the adaptive immune systems have been observed in many tumor
types and, depending on their nature, have been linked to prognostic outcome (Pages et al.,
2010; Roxburgh and McMillan, 2011) and response to treatment with conventional chemotherapies (Fridman
et al., 2011). One of the hallmarks of cancer is the
need for tumors to evade immune destruction (Hanahan and Weinberg, 2011), and yet equally important in many cases is the necessity of the
tumor to hijack inflammatory components of the immune response to create an environment that
fosters tumor growth and progression (Farrow et al., 2008; Hanahan and Weinberg, 2011).
In this review we focus on the inflammatory components of pancreatic stroma that contribute
to immune suppression, tumor cell growth and invasion. The negative growth effects of
cellular components, such as cytotoxic T lymphocytes, natural killer (NK) and dendritic
cells, along with their potential exploitation in the development of immunotherapies are
reviewed elsewhere (Koido et al., 2011; Vanneman and
Dranoff, 2012; Wachsmann et al., 2012). The role of specified inflammatory cells in PDAC
are detailed below and summarized in both Figure 1 and
Table 1.
Figure 1
Inflammatory cell infiltration promotes growth and invasion in pancreatic
cancer. Desmoplastic stroma accumulates as tumorigenesis progresses, increasing
vascular formation and the production of collagen while recruiting cells of the immune
system to enhance tumor growth. Mast cells and activated tumor associated macrophages
(TAMs) localize at the leading edge of the tumor where they can accelerate tumor
invasion, and TAMs are thought to enhance lymphatic metastasis and angiogenesis. Myeloid
derived suppressor cells (MDSCs), likewise, accumulate at the invasive front and inhibit
CD8+ cytotoxic T cells, enabling immune evasion. Regulatory T cells
(Tregs), which also suppress immune function, can be found in relatively high abundance
in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC). The presence of Th2 T helper cells in
greater numbers than Th1 has also been linked to increased tumor growth. PanIN =
Pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia.

Mast cells
Mast cells are associated with allergic and anaphylactic reactions and contribute to immune
responses to microbial infection (Gilfillan and Beaven, 2011). Other functions include facilitating tissue remodeling and repair following
injury, tumor repression and tumor growth (Gilfillan and Beaven, 2011). Mast cells produce and secrete potent angiogenic molecules, and
have been implicated in angiogenesis in various malignancies, including laryngeal squamous
cell carcinomas, lung cancers and malignant melanomas (Norrby, 2002). As tumors develop, mast cell precursors are attracted to the tumor
stroma. They express the receptor for stem cell factor (KIT) and tumor-derived stem cell
factor is believed to cause the recruitment and activation of mast cells in tumors (Ribatti
and Crivellato, 2011). Once activated, mast cells
release inflammatory factors such as interleukin-6 (IL-6), tumor necrosis factor-a,
and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF; Ribatti and Crivellato, 2011). Through the secretion of immunosuppressive cytokines such as
IL-10, mast cells downregulate the immune response to tumors (Ribatti and Crivellato, 2011). They also favor expansion and activation of
regulatory T (Treg) cells which promote immune tolerance (Ribatti and Crivellato, 2011).
In a transgenic mouse model of pancreatic cancer which expresses high levels of mutant
K-ras (KRasG12V), PDAC was
associated with an influx of mast cells (Chang et al., 2011). In this model, mast cells were evenly distributed in CP and pancreatic
intraepithelial neoplasia (PanIN) lesions, whereas they were observed at the infiltrating
edges of tumor. To determine the effects of mast cells on PDAC growth, pancreatic tumors
were grown orthotopically in mast cell-deficient mice (Kit-/-
mice). PDAC growth was significantly reduced in Kit-/- mice
compared to control mice, and the mast cell-deficient mice lived longer. These findings
matched those in human tissues from patients with PDAC (n = 67), in
which higher levels of mast cells corresponded with poor outcome, corroborating a trend seen
in a previous study (Esposito et al., 2004). More
recently, high mast cell counts in the cancerous border with normal tissue were linked to
poor prognosis (Cai et al., 2011). In
vitro studies have indicated that there may be cross-talk between mast cells and
PDAC cells. One study noted that signals secreted from PDAC cells stimulated mast cell
migration whilst reciprocating signals selectively increased proliferation of tumor cells
(Strouch et al., 2010). Furthermore mast cells were
found to promote the invasiveness of pancreatic tumor cells in a matrix metalloproteinase
(MMP)-dependent manner (Strouch et al., 2010).
The observation of mast cell infiltration in CP and PanIN lesions in
KRasG12V mice (Chang et
al., 2011), suggests that recruitment of mast cells
may occur early in the development of pancreatic cancer and is consistent with the notion of
inflammation potentiating neoplasia. It is likely that mast cells are involved in signaling
with other components of the tumor microenvironment as part of the overall inflammatory
response. IL-33 is known to activate mast cells and stimulate pro-inflammatory cytokine
production (Xu et al., 2008), and has been found to
be expressed in the nuclei of activated PSCs (Masamune et al., 2010). Similarly, mast cell tryptase contained within mast cell granules
and released upon degranulation has been found to stimulate hepatic stellate cell
proliferation and collagen production, an essential process in stromal formation
(Gaca et al., 2002). With the notable
presence of mast cells in the stroma of PDAC it will be interesting to elucidate their full
contribution to the pancreatic cancer tumor microenvironment and to PDAC cells directly.

Myeloid-derived suppressor cells
A number of different myeloid-derived cells feature within tumor stroma, including
myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs), tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs), and dendritic
cells. These cells and their ability to suppress the tumoral immune response, either alone
or through communication with each other, are reviewed by Ostrand-Rosenberg et al. (2012). MDSCs are immature myeloid cells that enhance
tumor growth by promoting angiogenesis and by suppressing components from both the innate
and the adaptive immune system (Ostrand-Rosenberg and Sinha, 2009; Ochando and Chen, 2012). They are
elevated in both the circulation and the tumor microenvironment of patients with cancer, and
comprise two main subsets, a monocytic subpopulation expressing CD14 and a granulocytic
subpopulation expressing CD15 (Ostrand-Rosenberg et al., 2012). MDSCs use a variety of mechanisms to actively suppress host immunity such
as inhibition of T-cell activation, through the production of reactive oxygen (Kusmartsev et
al., 2004) and nitrogen species and the depletion of
the amino acids arginine and L-cysteine; inhibition of T cell migration; expansion of
immunosuppressive Tregs and inhibition of NK cell cytotoxicity (Ostrand-Rosenberg et al.,
2012).
In a genetically modified mouse model of pancreatic cancer, in which oncogenic
KRasG12D is expressed in a
pancreas-specific fashion, the analysis of immune cells during pancreatic cancer progression
(Clark et al., 2007) revealed a slight elevation in
the number of MDSCs in PanIN lesions, giving way to a more pronounced increase in PDAC.
MDSCs accumulated around periductal areas and stroma in PDAC, although their infiltration
was delayed compared to macrophages (Clark et al., 2007). Interestingly, the presence of MDSC infiltrates was accompanied by a lack
of T cells, especially CD8+ cytotoxic T cells. This is consistent with
previous work which demonstrated that MDSCs inhibit the CD8+ T cell
response through the production of reactive oxygen species (Kusmartsev et al., 2004). The inhibitory effect of MDSCs on
CD8+ T cells was further supported by a recent study in which murine
pancreatic cancer cells (Panc02) were inoculated into immunocompetent mice (Pilon-Thomas et
al., 2011). Tumor-bearing mice exhibited
down-regulation of src homology 2 domain-containing inositol 5'-phosphatase-1
(SHIP-1) expression in splenocytes, and an expansion of MDSCs in the peripheral blood and
splenocytes. MDSCs from tumor-bearing mice overexpressed Bcl-2, contained
hyper-phosphorylated Akt (Pilon-Thomas et al., 2011)
and were found to suppress CD8+ T cell growth to a greater extent than
MDSCs from control mice (Pilon-Thomas et al., 2011).
In a study of patients with pancreatic (n = 46), oesophageal
(n = 60) and gastric (n = 25) cancers,
both Treg and MDSC (HLADR- Lin1low/-
CD33+ CD11b+) levels were found elevated in
peripheral blood of cancer patients compared to 54 healthy controls (Gabitass et al., 2011). The risk of death was increased as the percentage
of MDSCs increased (Gabitass et al., 2011).
Recently, a mechanism of tumor invasion has been identified where MDSCs alter the structure
of MHC class I expressed on the tumor cell surface, preventing the binding of processed
peptide that would otherwise activate antigen-specific CD8+ T cells (Lu
et al., 2011). This process was linked to the
production of peroxynitrite (PNT), the predominant source of which, in pancreatic cancer
patients, was myeloid cells.

Macrophages
Macrophages normally fight infection, facilitate wound healing and regulate tissue
homeostasis. They localize to sites of inflammation by responding to the chemoattractant,
monocyte chemotactic protein 1 (MCP-1; Farrow et al., 2008), and act as one of the crucial effectors of the inflammatory response,
releasing cytokines, and growth factors (Coussens and Werb, 2002). Their presence in the microenvironment of tumors has prompted analysis of
their role in cancer (reviewed in Ostrand-Rosenberg et al., 2012; Ruffell et al., 2012). TAMs possess a
number of characteristics that facilitate tumor growth and support metastasis. Through the
production of vascular endothelial growth factor A (VEGFA), they contribute to angiogenesis;
by producing components of ECM, such as collagens and ECM degrading enzymes, such as MMPs,
they contribute to stromal remodeling and to cell migration within the tumor
(Ostrand-Rosenberg et al., 2012; Ruffell et al.,
2012). Macrophages are classified into two extreme
phenotypic types, pro-inflammatory M1 macrophages and anti-inflammatory M2 macrophages,
although in reality the phenotype of macrophages is complex and cannot be fully explained by
a simple division into two discrete groups. M1-like macrophages promote tumor cell death,
while M2-like macrophages favor tumor progression (Ostrand-Rosenberg et al., 2012; Ruffell et al., 2012).
An assessment of TAMs in PDAC tumors, using the common macrophage marker, CD68 as well as
markers specific for receptors on M2-polarised macrophages, CD163 and CD204, found that the
presence of high numbers of M2-polarised macrophages correlated with a high incidence of
lymph node metastasis. Moreover, high lymphatic vessel density, as measured using
D2-40, and poor prognosis were observed in cases with high number of CD163 or
CD204-positive macrophages, but not CD68-positive macrophages (Kurahara et al., 2011).
A number of mechanisms have been proposed for the recruitment and activity of macrophages
in pancreatic tumors. Macrophage inflammatory protein-3a (Mip-3a) is
expressed in PDAC and mononuclear inflammatory cells in PDAC patient tissues (Kimsey et al.,
2004; Campbell et al., 2005). Specific interactions of Mip-3a and its receptor, chemokine
receptor 6 (CCR6) which is expressed in PDAC cells, have been shown to increase PDAC cell
proliferation, migration and invasion in type IV collagen, possibly through upregulation of
MMP-9 production in the tumor cells (Kleeff et al., 1999; Kimsey et al., 2004; Campbell et al.,
2005). Similarly, a role for VEGF has been
elucidated. VEGF is one of several cytokines to mediate macrophage recruitment to tumors.
Dineen et al. (2008) demonstrated the expression of
VEGF receptor 2 on TAMs of orthotopic pancreatic tumors in mice. Selective inhibition of
this receptor diminished macrophage infiltration into these tumors. Focal adhesion kinase
(FAK), a known regulator of cell migration, proliferation, apoptosis, and survival, has also
been implicated in enabling macrophage infiltration in PDAC (Stokes et al., 2011). Interestingly, an intracellular matrix protein,
the matricellular glycoprotein secreted protein acidic and rich in cysteine (SPARC) has been
shown to influence the infiltration and the distribution of macrophages to pancreatic tumors
in mice. Panc02 cells were grown subcutaneously in SPARC-null and wild-type SPARC mice.
F4/80-expressing murine macrophages were more plentiful in tumors from wild-type mice, and
were distributed at the margins of tumors. By contrast in SPARC-null mice, the distribution
of macrophages was even throughout the tumors (Puolakkainen et al., 2004).
Other mechanisms underpinning the actions of macrophages in pancreatic cancer have also
been suggested. TAMs were found to produce Sonic hedgehog (Shh) upon stimulation of the
NF-k B pathway, causing an increase in PDAC cell proliferation, while IL-1b
release from stimulated macrophage cells was shown to protect PDAC cells from drug-induced
apoptosis by upregulating cyclooxygenase 2 (COX-2) production (Angst et al., 2008; Yamasaki et al., 2010).

T cells
CD3+ T lymphocyte infiltrations have been reported in both human and
mouse PDAC tissue specimens (von Bernstorff et al., 2001; Clark et al., 2007). Studies have
focused on the presence and function of CD4+
CD25high T regulatory cells (Tregs; Hiraoka et al., 2006; Gabitass et al., 2011). Like MDSCs, Tregs display an immunosuppressive phenotype, and are important
mediators of immune evasion in cancer. The mechanisms used by Tregs to suppress immune
function, including the suppression of CD4+ CD25-
conventional T cells, are reviewed elsewhere (Menetrier-Caux et al., 2012; Schmidt et al., 2012). As
stated already in this article, the numbers of both Tregs (CD4+
CD25+ CD127low/-
FoxP3+) and MDSCs were found to be elevated in the circulation of
pancreatic cancer patients and correlated with one another (Gabitass et al., 2011). CD4+ FoxP3+
Tregs have been identified in PDAC tissues in significantly higher quantities than in
non-neoplastic inflammatory pancreatic stroma (Hiraoka et al., 2006). Moreover, higher levels of Tregs corresponded with more poorly
differentiated tumors. Similarly, analysis of progressive grades of PanIN revealed a
significant increase in the prevalence of Tregs from low-grade PanIN to invasive ductal
carcinoma, with a corresponding decrease in CD8+ T cell infiltration with
PanIN progression. High tumoral Treg levels were associated with poor prognosis (Hiraoka et
al., 2006).
Possible mechanisms for the increase in abundance of Tregs in the tumor microenvironment
have been demonstrated in mouse models. Panc02 cells inoculated into a murine host were
shown to secrete chemokine (C-C motif) ligand 5 (CCL5; Tan et al., 2009) and transforming growth factor-b (TGF-b; Moo-Young
et al., 2009) resulting in the recruitment of Tregs
or the conversion of CD4+ CD25- naive T cells into
Tregs (Moo-Young et al., 2009).
Along with Tregs, T helper (Th) cells have also been studied in PDAC, though the literature
on the subject is limited. Th cells activate cells of the innate immune system, facilitate
wound repair and provide assistance to B cells and cytotoxic CD8+ T cells
(O'Shea and Paul, 2010; Okoye and Wilson,
2011). Several subsets of Th cell exist including
Th1 cells that produce interferon-g (IFN-g) and induce microbial
elimination, and Th2 cells that secrete IL-4 and IL-13 and are thought to mediate helminth
immunity (Abbas et al., 1996; O'Shea and Paul,
2010). Immunohistochemical analyses of PDAC samples
have revealed the presence of both Th1 and Th2 cell populations, with evidence that the
quantity and activity of Th cells are skewed toward the Th2 subset (Bellone et al., 1999; Tassi et al., 2008). A recent study reported that the ratio of Th2 GATA-3+ to
Th1 T-bet+ cells is an independent predictor of disease-free and overall
survival in PDAC patients, suggesting a link between Th2 prevalence and tumor progression
(de Monte et al., 2011). The authors propose a
mechanism whereby tumor cells induce the release of thymic stromal lymphopoietin (TSLP) from
cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) which subsequently activates tumor antigen-loaded
dendritic cells. They posit that dendritic cells then migrate and activate tumor
antigen-specific Th2 cells at the draining lymph nodes. The activated Th2 cells then home to
the tumor site and may promote tumor growth (de Monte et al., 2011). This study illustrates the important cross-talk between components
of the stroma and the immune system.

Neutrophils
Neutrophils play crucial roles in defense against infectious diseases, act as early
modulators of inflammation and are often the initial recruited effector at sites of acute
inflammation. They are key regulators of the immune response (Kumar and Sharma, 2010; Mantovani et al., 2011).
A recent systematic analysis of tumor infiltrating neutrophils was undertaken in a variety
of pancreatic neoplasms (Reid et al., 2011). The
authors defined 10 or more infiltrating neutrophils per 100 epithelial cells as positive,
and classified more than 15 tumor-infiltrating neutrophils as significant. Significant
neutrophil infiltrates were rarely found in PDAC, but were observed in micropapillary and
undifferentiated types of poor prognosis.
In PDAC, an elevated pre-operative neutrophil-lymphocyte ratio (NLR) was reported to be
associated with poor prognosis, contrasting with platelet-lymphocyte ratio, which showed no
relationship with outcome (Bhatti et al., 2010). The
prognostic value of NLR was verified in an independent study (Wang et al., 2012) and is consistent with observations made in other
malignancies (Walsh et al., 2005; Gomez et al., 2008; Cho et al., 2009; Sarraf et al., 2009).

Concluding remarks
Cancer cells express tumor antigens and can elicit an immune response. Unfortunately,
tumors also develop mechanisms enabling themselves to escape immune surveillance. Hiraoka et
al. (2011) recently investigated the host immune
response in intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm (IPMN), a precursor lesion that can lead
to pancreatic cancer. The adenoma stage (IPMA) was characterized by an antitumor immune
response. However, the immune reaction changed to immune tolerance in the carcinoma stage
(IPMC). Inflammatory cells can contribute to tumorigenesis through immune suppression. They
also facilitate cancer progression by promoting angiogenesis and facilitating cancer
metastasis. Our review has focused on the tumor-promoting effects of inflammatory cells, as
opposed to the anti-tumoral effects of inflammatory cells. Although good progress has been
made in understanding how inflammatory cells support tumor growth, a great deal of research
is still necessary before we fully appreciate the tumor promoting roles of these cells in
PDAC.
Conflict of interest statement
The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or
financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
