[Abstract, Results, Discussion, Methods]

FTS and 2-DG induce pancreatic cancer cell death and tumor shrinkage in
mice. The Ras inhibitor S-trans-trans farnesylthiosalicylic acid (FTS) inhibits active Ras, which controls cell proliferation, differentiation, survival, and metabolism. FTS also inhibits HIF1a expression in cancer cells, leading to an energy crisis. The synthetic glucose analog 2-deoxy-D-glucose (2-DG), which inhibits glycolysis, is selectively directed to tumor cells that exhibit increased glucose consumption. The 2-DG enters tumor cells, where it competes with glucose for glycolytic enzymes. In cancer models, as well as in human phase 1 trials, 2-DG inhibits tumor growth without toxicity. We postulated that under normoxic conditions, tumor cells treated with FTS would be more sensitive than normal cells to 2-DG. We show here that combined treatment with FTS and 2-DG inhibited cancer cell proliferation additively, yet induced apoptotic cell death synergistically both in vitro and in vivo. The induced apoptosis was inferred from QVD-OPH inhibition, an increase in cleaved caspase 3, and loss of survivin. FTS and 2-DG when combined, but not separately, also induced an increase in fibrosis of the tumor tissue, chronic inflammation, and tumor shrinkage. Overall, these results suggest a possible new treatment of pancreatic tumors by the combined administration of FTS and 2-DG, which together induce pancreatic tumor cell death and tumor shrinkage under non-toxic conditions.

Results
Combined treatment with FTS and 2-DG synergistically induces cell death
of panc-1 pancreatic carcinoma cells
FTS has been shown to inhibit the anchorage-dependent and -independent
proliferation of panc-1 and MIA PaCa-2 pancreatic cell lines that harbor
oncogenic K-Ras, without inducing cell death.24, 26 The first set
of experiments with 2-DG in the present study was aimed at establishing a
dosage at which the effect of 2-DG on cell survival, when administered by
itself, is minimal. Increasing the ratio of 2-DG to glucose has been shown
to result in tumor cell death.33
In this study, therefore, we employed a non-toxic dose, 5 mM 2-DG,
combined with equimolar glucose, which by itself is not toxic and has been
shown, for example, to enhance the cytotoxicity of topoisomerase
inhibitors.34 The extent
of death of 2-DG-treated panc-1 cells in our experiments was small and was
similar to that observed in untreated controls (3% death), confirming
that 2-DG alone, at least at the dosage employed here, does not affect
panc-1 cell survival. We therefore used this non-toxic dose of 2-DG for all
subsequent experiments.
Next, we performed a four-armed experiment in which panc-1 cells were treated
with the vehicle (DMSO) only, 2-DG alone, FTS alone, and FTS combined with
2-DG (FTS+2-DG), as described in Materials and Methods. Images from a
typical experiment performed with panc-1 cells are shown in Figure 1a. Phase-contrast images show that treatment
with FTS alone (75 mM) induced, as expected, a decrease
in cell number (by about 50% Figures 1a and
b). Treatment with 2-DG alone (5 mM) also resulted in a
decrease in cell number, but the reduction was smaller (20-25%,
Figure 1b). Hoechst staining showed that
neither of these single-drug treatments caused a significant increase in
cell death, compared with the control (Figures 1a and
c); the percentages of dead cells in the control (DMSO and
10 mM glucose) and in cells treated with 2-DG (5 mM
2-DG+5 mM glucose), or FTS (50 mM
FTS+10 mM glucose or 75 mM
FTS+10 mM glucose) were 1.95+-1.4, 2.5+-4.5,
3.3+-1.2, and 7.4+-5.7, respectively (Figure
1c). In contrast, combined treatment with FTS+2-DG caused
a significant increase in cell death; in cells treated with FTS
(50 mM)+2-DG, and with FTS
(75 mM)+2-DG, the percentages of dead cells were
11.5+-5.8 and 30+-9.3, respectively (Figure
1c). Thus, under conditions in which neither FTS nor 2-DG alone
induced death of panc-1 cells, significant cell death was induced by their
combination. This result clearly points to a synergistic effect of the two
drugs in killing the panc-1 carcinoma cells.
Combined treatment with FTS and 2-DG induces cell death in primary
pancreatic carcinoma cell lines
We then performed a similar set of experiments to determine whether the
effects of treatment with FTS and with 2-DG observed in panc-1 cells could
also be obtained in primary pancreatic tumor cells, which better mimic the
actual disease. The cells used for this purpose were from the recently
characterized human primary pancreatic carcinoma cell lines pp161, pp78, and
pp109.35 All three cell
lines possess an oncogenic K-Ras allele, and pp161 and pp78, but not pp109,
also bear a p53 loss-of-function mutation. Hoechst staining showed that
relative to the control, neither of the single-drug treatments caused
significant cell death in pp78 or pp161 cells (Figures 2a
and c), but both induced significant death in pp109 cells
(Figure 2b). However, the combined treatment
with 75 mM FTS+2-DG significantly increased cell
death in all three cell lines, as in panc-1 cells. The phase contrast images
show that 75 mM FTS alone induced a decrease of about
50% in the total numbers of pp 109 (Figure
2e), pp161 (Figure 2f), and pp 78
cells (Figure 2d). Treatment with 2-DG alone
also resulted in a decrease in cell number, but its effect was weaker than
that of FTS alone (Figures 2d-f).
Interestingly, in pp78 and pp161, both mutant p53 cell lines, the combined
treatment exerted a synergistic effect, whereas in the wild-type p53 cell
line pp109, the effect was additive. The reason for this phenomenon is not
yet known. However, a beneficial effect of FTS+2-DG on cell death was
observed in all three primary pancreatic carcinoma cells, as in panc-1
cells.
Combined treatment with FTS and 2-DG induces caspase-dependent
apoptosis in panc-1 cells
Consistently with early reports, FTS (75 mM) alone and
5 mM 2-DG alone, both reduced the amount of Ras in the cells, and a
similar reduction was achieved with their combined treatment (Figure 3a). To determine whether the cell death
induced by FTS+2-DG in panc-1 cells was apoptotic in nature, we used
the pan-caspase inhibitor QVD-OPH,36 which inhibits the formation of cleaved (active)
caspase 3 (Figure 3a). We found that death
induced by the combination of FTS and 2-DG was significantly inhibited by
QVD-OPH (Figure 3b), suggesting that the cell
death induced by FTS+2-DG was, at least in part, apoptotic in nature
and dependent on caspase activation. This was confirmed by the observed
increase in active (cleaved) caspase 3 by FTS but not 2-DG, and by marked
enhancement of the cleaved caspase 3 by FTS+2-DG, apparently similar to
that observed with staurosporine, a well-known inducer of apoptosis (Figure 3a).
In previous studies, we found that FTS induces a marked decrease in the
apoptosis inhibitor survivin.37 We
therefore examined the effect of FTS+2-DG on survivin levels in panc-1
cells. Although treatment with each drug on its own decreased survivin
levels to some extent, the combined treatment completely eliminated the
protein in a synergistic manner (Figure 3a).
This effect was even stronger than that induced by staurosporine (Figure 3a). It is important to note that treatment
with FTS+2-DG can block the main energy source of cancer cells, both by
reducing their expression of HIF1a and by competing with
glucose for glycolysis.27 This
dual attack on energy metabolism, together with other anti-cancer effects of
FTS (such as attenuation of cell-cycle progression38), may lead to the catastrophic cellular stress
terminating in apoptotic cell death, as observed here.
Treatment with FTS+2-DG synergistically induces shrinkage of
panc-1 tumors in nude mice
To examine the effect of treatment with FTS+2-DG in vivo, we
implanted panc-1 cells subcutaneously just above the right femoral joint of
nude mice. Once palpable tumors were observed, oral drug treatment was
started (see Materials and Methods). After 18 days, tumors were removed and
weighed. As shown in Figure 4, the average tumor
weight in the group treated with 2-DG (1000 mg/kg) did not differ
significantly from that of the vehicle-treated control group. Tumors treated
with FTS (60 mg/kg), consistently with our previous findings,
weighed 50% less, on average, than tumors excised from the
vehicle-treated controls.24
Remarkably, however, treatment with FTS+2-DG resulted in tumors that
weighed 90% less, on average, than the controls, with no toxic side
effects. Some mice even exhibited tumor remission (data not shown). These
results clearly point to a synergistic effect of FTS+2-DG in inhibiting
tumor growth, similar to the synergism observed in vitro.
Typical H&E sections from tumors removed from the mice for pathological
analysis, as described in Materials and Methods and shown in Figure 5, revealed the following significant changes
in tumor morphology in the group treated with FTS+2-DG. First, in
contrast to the similarity in invasiveness between tumors from the control
group and from the groups treated by the single drugs, tumors treated with
FTS+2-DG appeared much less invasive, and their edges were not as
irregular. Second, tumors treated with either of the single drugs exhibited
only slightly more fibrosis than the controls, especially at their edges,
whereas tumors treated with FTS+2-DG exhibited marked fibrosis around
the tumor edges and at the leading edges (Figure
5, white arrow in hematoxylin and eosin (H&E)). Third, only
the tumors treated with FTS+2-DG exhibited significant chronic
inflammation (Figure 5, yellow arrow in H&E)
and fibrosis.
These changes in tumor morphology suggest that treatment with FTS+2-DG
induced death of the tumor cells in the tissue. To verify this notion, we
stained tumor sections with TUNEL to identify apoptotic cell death. As shown
in Figure 5, tumors treated with either of the
single drugs showed some TUNEL staining, which was altogether lacking in the
control tumors. However, tumors treated with FTS+2-DG exhibited strong
and significant TUNEL staining, especially at the tumor edges, indicating
massive apoptotic cell death of the tumor tissue (Figure
5). These findings confirmed that treatment of panc-1 tumors
with FTS+2-DG in mice significantly inhibited tumor growth by inducing
apoptosis of the tumor cells.

Discussion
Activating mutations in Ras contribute to 30% of all human
tumors,1 suggesting Ras as a
prime target for cancer therapy. The specific Ras inhibitor, FTS, successfully
competes with Ras chaperones for binding to active Ras, rendering it inactive
and thus causing inhibition of tumor cell proliferation in vitro and
in vivo.14, 15, 20 In a
recent study, it was shown, moreover, that 2-DG induced
HIF1a-independent apoptosis in rhabdomyosarcoma
cells.39
In the present study, both FTS and 2-DG, when administered as single agents, were
found to inhibit the proliferation of panc-1 tumor cells, and when administered
in combination, their effect on such tumor growth was additive. In contrast,
whereas monotherapy with FTS or with a low (non-toxic) dose of the glycolysis
inhibitor 2-DG was incapable of causing significant death in this pancreatic
tumor cell line, combined administration of the two agents prompted their
synergistic effect resulting in significant cell death, as demonstrated in
vitro by Hoechst labeling and in vivo by TUNEL. A beneficial
effect of FTS+2-DG on cell death was also obtained in three human primary
pancreatic carcinoma cell lines35
(additively in the pp109 cell line and synergistically in pp78 and pp161). Proof
that this cell death was apoptotic in nature came from its observed inhibition
by the apoptosis inhibitor QD-OPH (Figure 3b), as
well as from the increase in active (cleaved) caspase 3 and decrease in
pro-caspases 7 and 9 (not shown) induced by FTS+2-DG. Further evidence came
from the fact that the apoptosis inhibitor survivin, in which FTS by itself
induces a marked decrease,37 was
completely eliminated in response to the combined treatment (Figure 3a).
It is important to point out that FTS itself is not cytotoxic either in
vitro or in vivo. Our in-vivo experiments in mice, in
which tumors induced by implantation of panc-1 cells were treated with FTS
combined with non-toxic dose of 2-DG, resulted in shrinkage of pancreatic tumors
and changes in tumor morphology as described in detail in Results - is an
unexpected and novel finding.
Taken together, our results suggest a possible novel treatment of pancreatic
tumor by combining FTS and 2-DG under non-toxic conditions. This can be expected
to provide synergistic tumor shrinkage, cell death, and possibly, also
remission.

Materials and Methods
Cell culture and immunoblotting
The human pancreatic cancer cell line panc-1 was obtained from the American
Tissue Culture Association. Human primary pancreatic cancer cells pp78,
pp109, and pp161 were kindly donated by Andrea Cavazzana (University of
Pisa, Pisa). All cells were maintained in DMEM/10% fetal calf
serum (FCS) at a constant temperature of 37degC in a humidified atmosphere
of 95% air/5% CO2. Immunoblotting of Ras,
cleaved caspase 3, survivin and beta-tubulin were performed with specific Ab
as previously described.27
Materials used for cell culture and determination of cell proliferation and
death were all as previously described.27 FTS (batch number 012894-A-01-003) was provided
by Concordia Pharmaceuticals (Fort Lauderdale, FL, USA). 2-DG was purchased
from Sigma (St. Louis, MO, USA; cat number D3179).
Determination of cell proliferation and death
Cells (panc-1 or human primary pancreatic tumor cells) were plated in
1 ml of DMEM containing 5% FCS in 24-well plates at a density
of 10 000 per well and treated 24 h later with FTS (50 or
75 mM) or vehicle (0.1% DMSO). After an
additional 48 h, the media were replaced by medium containing either
10 mM glucose, or 5 mM glucose and 5 mM 2-DG.
FTS-treated cells were replenished with FTS or FTS plus 2-DG, or glucose
with 0.1% DMSO (control). After incubation for 24 or 48 h, as
specified for each experiment, the extent of cell death was determined by
staining of the cells for 5 min with Hoechst 33258
(1 mg/ml). Stained nuclei (dead cells) were
visualized under a fluorescence microscope. Phase-contrast images were also
obtained. All experiments were performed in quadruplicate and were repeated
four times. Data were collected by imaging of each well. The total number of
cells was obtained by counting them in the phase-contrast images. The number
of dead cells were counted from the fluorescence images and expressed as
percentages (means +-S.D.) of the total number of cells.
Tumor implantation in mice
Nude CD1-Nu mice (8 weeks old) were housed in barrier facilities
on a 12-h light/dark cycle. Food and water were supplied ad
libitum. On day 0, 7 x 106 panc-1 cells in
0.1 ml of phosphate-buffered saline were xenografted subcutaneously
just above the right femoral joint.
On day 10, tumors were measured and the mice were divided into four groups
for treatment with daily oral doses (300 ml) of FTS
(60 mg/kg) and/or 2-DG (1000 mg/kg), or of
0.5% carboxymethylcellulose (control).
After 23 days of treatment, tumors were extracted and weighed. The experiment
was performed twice, and average tumor weights for each group were
calculated (means +-S.D., n=7 per experiment).
Statistical significance of the results was determined by non-parametric
ANOVA (Kruskal-Wallis test).
Histology and TUNEL staining
Panc-1 tumors were extracted and histological sections (5 and
10 mm) were prepared. The 10-mm sections
were stained with H&E and were then imaged using an Olympus fluorescence
microscope (Olympus Europa Holding GmbH, Hamburg, Germany) (original
magnification x 200). H&E sections were also sent for thorough
pathological examination. The 5-mm sections were subjected to
TUNEL according to the manufacturer's instructions (MBL International,
Woburn, MA, USA) and were then imaged using a Nikon fluorescence microscope
(Nikon lnstech, Tokyo, Japan) (original magnification x 200).
