[Abstract, Methods, Mixed]

RNA sequencing of pancreatic circulating tumour cells implicates WNT signaling in metastasis. Circulating tumour cells (CTCs) shed into blood from primary cancers include putative precursors that initiate distal metastases1. While these cells are extraordinarily rare, they may identify cellular pathways contributing to the blood-borne dissemination of cancer. Here, we adapted a microfluidic device2 for efficient capture of CTCs from an endogenous mouse pancreatic cancer model3 and subjected CTCs to single molecule RNA sequencing4, identifying Wnt2 as a candidate gene enriched in CTCs. Expression of Wnt2 in pancreatic cancer cells suppresses anoikis, enhances anchorage-independent sphere formation, and increases metastatic propensity in vivo. This effect is correlated with fibronectin upregulation and suppressed by inhibition of Map3k7 (Tak1) kinase. In humans, formation of non-adherent tumour spheres by pancreatic cancer cells is associated with upregulation of multiple Wnt genes, and pancreatic CTCs revealed enrichment for Wnt signaling in 5 of 11 cases. Thus, molecular analysis of CTCs may identify candidate therapeutic targets to prevent the distal spread of cancer.

Methods
Mice, tumour tissues, and cell lines
Mice with pancreatic cancer used in these experiments express Cre driven by Pdx1 or P48, LSL-KrasG12D, and Tp53lox/+ or Tp53lox/lox as previously described 2. Normal B6/129, FVB, and Nu/Nu mice were purchased from Jackson Laboratory. For cardiocentesis, animals were sedated with isofluorane, the chest wall was sterilized with ethanol and a skin incision was made above the rib cage. A 23-gauge needle was used to draw approximately 1 mL of blood into a syringe primed with 100 uL of PBS-10mM EDTA pH 7.4 (Gibco). Animals were then euthanized per animal protocol guidelines. Pancreatic tumours and normal tissues were extracted and separated using flash freezing with liquid nitrogen for RNA extraction and fixation with 4% PFA followed by paraffin embedding (FFPE) for RNA-ISH and histochemistry. Ascites if present was sterilely removed with a 23G needle syringe and cells were pelleted by centrifugation. Pelleted cells were flash frozen in liquid nitrogen for RNA extraction. Cell lines generated from mouse tumours and human pancreatic cancer cell lines were cultured in RPMI-1640 + 10% FBS + 1% Pen/Strep (Gibco/Invitrogen).
HbCTC-Chip Production, Preparation and Blood Processing
HbCTC-Chips were manufactured on site at the MGH Cancer Center/ BioMEMS Resource Facility, and chips were functionalized using biotinylated antibodies as previously described 1. Mouse HbCTC-Chips were functionalized with biotinylated anti-mouse EpCAM (CD326) antibody (Biolegend 118204) or isotype control biotinylated Rat IgG2a (Biolegend 400504). Human HbCTC-Chips were functionalized with biotinylated polyclonal goat anti-human EpCAM (R&D Systems BAF960) or control goat IgG antibody (R&D Systems BAF108).
For mouse samples, approximately 1 mL of mouse blood was diluted 1:1 with PBS-10 mM EDTA pH 7.4 and a total volume of 1 mL of diluted blood was processed on each HbCTC-Chip, using a Harvard Apparatus volumetric syringe pump set at 1.5 mL/hr. After processing the blood, devices were washed with PBS followed by analyses as described below.
Human blood specimens obtained for CTC analysis was obtained after informed consent, per IRB protocol (05-300) at the Massachusetts General Hospital (MGH). A maximum of 20 mL of blood were obtained at any given blood draw, using EDTA vacutainers. Blood specimens were processed through the HbCTC-Chip within 4 hours of blood draw. Approximately 3 mL of blood was processed through the HbCTC-Chip, using the pressure controlled apparatus, at a target flow rate of 1.5 mL/hr as previously described 2.
CTC staining and enumeration
Following blood processing, captured cells on the HbCTC-Chip were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde and washed with PBS. The fixed cells were then permeabilized with 1% NP40 in PBS, blocked with either 5% donkey serum (mouse samples) or 3% goat serum/2% BSA (human samples), and then immunostained with the relevant primary antibodies. Primary antibodies for the mouse CTC analyses were rabbit anti-wide spectrum cytokeratin (1:50, Abcam ab9377), chicken anti-GFP (1:1000, Abcam ab13970) and goat anti-mouse CD45 (1:500, R&D systems AF114). Primary antibodies for the human CTC analyses were rabbit anti-wide spectrum cytokeratin (1:50, Abcam ab9377), rabbit anti-EpCAM (1:500, Abcam ab71916), and mouse IgG1 anti-CD45 (1:1000, BD 55480). Secondary immunofluorescent-tagged antibodies were used for signal amplification. For the mouse, these were donkey anti-rabbit Alexa Fluor 594 (1:500, Invitrogen A-21207), donkey anti-chicken Dylight(tm) 488 (1:500, Jackson ImmunoResearch 703-486-155) and donkey anti-goat Alexa Fluor 488 (1:500, Invitrogen A-11055). For human, the secondary antibodies were goat anti-rabbit Alexa Fluor 594 (1:500, Invitrogen A-11012) and goat anti-mouse IgG1 Alexa Fluor 488 (1:500, Invitrogen A-21121). Nuclei were then stained with DAPI and the devices were washed with PBS and stored at 4degC. The devices were imaged under 10x magnification using the BioView Ltd. automated imaging system (Billerica, MA) as well as an automated upright fluorescence microscope (Eclipse 90i, Nikon, Melville, NY). Positive staining for CK or EpCAM, without CD45 staining, was required for scoring potential CTCs, which were then manually reviewed. Threshold and baseline signals were established using specimens from non-tumour bearing mice or healthy human controls.
RNA Extraction and Purification from the HbCTC-Chip and from tissues
RNA from CTC-enriched cell populations was isolated from the devices using a modified protocol for the Qiagen RNeasy MinElute kit (Qiagen). Briefly, 375 ul of the RLT buffer was pipetted into the HbCTC-Chip with mixing between the inlet and outlet of the device. The resulting RLT lysate was then loaded onto the Qiagen RNeasy MinElute column and RNA was purified per protocol. RNA was eluted in a total of ~ 10 uL RNase free water.
To isolate RNA from fresh frozen tissues, the material was pulverized with a sterile pestle in a microfuge tube on dry ice. RNA from cell lines and fresh frozen tumour and normal tissues were all processed in the same manner. RNA was extracted using the TRIzol(r) Reagent (Invitrogen) per manufacturer's specifications.
Single Molecule Sequencing
Purified RNA was subjected to Digital Gene Expression (DGE) sample prepping and analyzed on the HeliScope(tm) Single Molecule Sequencer from Helicos BioSciences.
For mouse samples, a low quantity on surface RNA capture followed by cDNA synthesis and sequencing method was developed and used on RNA from EpCAM HbCTC-Chip, IgG HbCTC-Chip, primary tumour, and metastatic ascites. This method has been previously described 3. Briefly, the purified RNA in RNAse free water was hybridized in 10ul volume to Helicos poly(dT)-coated sequencing flow cell channels in 1X SSC, 0.05% SDS at 37degC for 30 minutes. First-strand cDNA was synthesized with the SuperScript III first-strand cDNA synthesis kit (Invitrogen) using manufacturer's recommendations, except that no additional primers were added, and the incubation steps were modified as follows: 37degC 15 minutes, and 55degC 45 minutes. Subsequent to cDNA synthesis, hot water was passed through the channels to degrade and melt away the RNA strands. Guanine tailing was performed using terminal transferase, by adding 500uM guanine in 20ul volume in 1X TdT buffer, 2.5mM CoCl2 and 20 units terminal transferase per channel. The reaction took place at 37degC for 30 minutes, followed by 3' blocking with 100uM ddGTP and ddATP under the same reaction conditions. The 18 nt poly-C primers were hybridized at 50nM in 1X SSC, 0.05% SDS at 55degC for 30 minutes, followed by step-wise "fill" steps with 500uM cytosine and adenine nucleotides with 5 units Klenow fragment (NEB) in 1X NEB2 buffer and 20ul reaction volume per channel. The lock step was then performed with virtual terminator guanine and thymidine nucleotide analogs. Single molecule sequencing by synthesis was then initiated using standard procedures 12.
For human CTC samples, initial low quantity on surface methods did not have sufficient yield, so application of a low quantity RNA-seq method was utilized as previously described 12. Briefly, the purified RNA in RNAse free water was converted to first-strand cDNA with the SuperScript III first-strand cDNA synthesis kit (Invitrogen) using random hexamers according to the manufacturer's recommendations. RNA was digested and single stranded cDNA was purified using a combination of QIAquick nucleotide removal kit (Invitrogen) and ethanol precipitation with ammonium acetate and glycogen. Single stranded cDNA was denatured and then a poly-A tail was added to the 3' end using terminal transferase (New England Biolabs). Tailed cDNAs were then hybridized to the sequencing flow cell followed by "Fill and Lock" and subjected to single molecule sequencing by synthesis.
Bioinformatics
DGE
To compute digital gene expression (DGE) from the Helicos sequence data, we used the DGE pipeline of the HeliSphere 1.1.498.63 software (open.helicosbio.com) using the Human.Txome and Mouse.Txome (ftp://ftp.helicosbio.com/pub/distribution) reference files 13. We ignored DGE output corresponding to mitochondrial and ribosomal RNA and Helicos control spike-ins.
DEGSeq
DEGseq comparisons of DGE profiles were run using the DEGexp function of version 1.0.5 of the Bioconductor (www.bioconductor.org) DEGseq package. The "method" argument was set to "MARS" for the MA-plot-based method with Random Sampling 5 and the threshold for statistical significance was a Benjamini-Hochberg q-value (i.e., FDR estimate) of 10%.
hGSEA
We performed hypergeometric gene set enrichment analysis (hGSEA) as follows. To determine whether gene set A was enriched in gene set B, we used the hypergeometric distribution to test whether the overlap of A and B was larger than would be expected by chance had A and B been drawn randomly from all the genes quantitated by the DGE. To account for multiple hypothesis testing, we applied the method of Benjamini and Hochberg to the p-values so generated for each analysis, yielding false discover rate (FDR) estimates. The odds ratio (OR) is the odds of a gene being in A given it is in B divided by the odds of that gene being in A given it is not in B. Gene sets evaluated were obtained from MSigDB (Broad Institute).
QuantiGene ViewRNA in-situ hybridization on HbCTC-Chip
Following blood processing, HbCTC-Chips were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde, washed with PBS and dehydrated with ethanol at increasing concentrations (50%, 70%, and 100%). HbCTC-Chips were submerged in 100% ethanol at -20deg C for storage. Of note, mouse metastatic ascites fluid was also run on HbCTC-Chips for RNA-ISH analysis. Before further analysis, cells were rehydrated using decreasing concentrations of ethanol (70% and 50%) and washed with PBS. ISH was performed using QuantiGene ViewRNA protocols. HbCTC-Chip were permeabilized with Working Detergent Solution (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA), and digested with Protease (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA) at 1:2000 dilution in PBS. The HbCTC-Chips were hybridized for 3 hours at 40deg C with custom-designed QuantiGene ViewRNA probes against Wnt2 and Cytokeratins 8 and 18. Unbound probes were flushed out with Wash Buffer (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA) and HbCTC-Chips were stored overnight at 4deg C in Storage Buffer (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA). The bound probes were amplified the following day through PreAmp (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA) hybridization for 1 hour at 40deg C, followed by Amp (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA) hybridization for 1 hour at 40deg C. Label Probes (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA) targeting the individual probe types were added for 1 hour at 40deg C. HbCTC-Chips were stained with DAPI, and images were taken using a Nikon 90i microscope.
QuantiGene ViewRNA in-situ hybridization on FFPE tissue
Mouse tissue for FFPE was prepared per standard protocol by the MGH Clinical and Research Pathology Cores. ISH was performed using QuantiGene ViewRNA protocols. 5 micron sections were cut, fixed in 10% formaldehyde (Fisher Scientific, Pittsburgh, PA), deparaffinized, boiled in pre-treatment solution (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA) and digested with proteinase K (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA). Sections were hybridized for 3 hours at 40deg with a custom designed QuantiGene ViewRNA probes against Wnt2 and the control gene Ubc (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA). Bound probes were then amplified per protocol from Affymetrix using PreAmp and Amp molecules. Multiple Label Probe oligonucleotides conjugated to alkaline phosphatase (LP-AP Type 1) are then added and Fast Red Substrate is used to produce signal (red dots, Cy3 fluorescence). For two color assays, an LP-AP type 6 probe is used with Fast Blue substrate (blue dots, Cy5 fluorescence) followed by LP-AP type 1 probe with Fast Red Substrate (red dots, Cy3 fluorescence) to produce a dual colorimetric and fluorescent signal. Wnt2 probes were used in type 1/Fast Red and pooled CK 8 and 18 were used in type 6/Fast Blue. Slides are then counterstained with Hematoxylin. Serial sections were also subjected to Hematoxylin & Eosin staining per standard histology protocol to confirm the identity of cells in the region of RNA-ISH. Images were taken by a Nikon 90i scope with color camera.
Constructs and Viral Infection
The mouse Wnt2 open reading frame was cloned into pENTRI plasmid as a BamHI-XhoI fragment. pWPI plasmid carrying Wnt2 open reading frame was generated by gateway cloning following the manufacturer's protocol (Invitrogen). Luciferase gene was expressed in pMSCV plasmid containing hygromycin selection marker. 7TFP construct (7xTcf-FFluc) used in TopFlash assay was from addgene. pLKO shRNAs targeting the mouse FN1 and Tak1 were from the RNAi consortium at the Broad Institute. Control shRNA constructs for Luciferase (Catalog# SHC007) and non-target (Catalog# SHC016) were purchased from Sigma. Target sequences for Fn1: 5'-GCCTAGAAATACCTTTCTCTT-3'; for Tak1: B4 5'-AGGCAAAGCAACAGAGTGAAT-3'; B7 5'-TCTGAGAGGAAGGCTTTCATT-3'; B6 5'-CAGCCCTAGTGTCAGAATGAT -3'. Vesicular stomatitis virus glycoprotein-pseudotyped retroviruses or lentiviruses were generated using 293T cells as packaging cell lines following protocols described in the RNAi Consortium (Broad Institute). NB508 cells were infected with pWPI virus followed by GFP-positive cell sorting. pMSCV-luciferase was introduced into the cells and followed by 200 ug/ml hygromycin B selection. Cells transduced with pLKO shRNA virus were selected with 2 ug/ml puromycin. On-target plus siRNA constructs were purchased from Dharmacon (MYCN: L-058793-01; ETV4: L-048237-01; non-targeting pool: D-001810-10-20) and transfected into cells with Lipofectamine RNAiMax (Invitrogen).
Tumourigenicity and Experimental Metastasis Assays
The animal protocol was approved by the MGH Subcommittee on Research Animal Care. Six-week old Nu/Nu mice were anesthetized by isofluorane, 1 x 106 NB508 cells expressing vector, or Wnt2 in 100 ul of PBS were injected subcutaneously on the right flank of the mice. Primary tumours, CTCs, and lungs were sampled after 2 weeks. Six to 8-week old FVB mice were used for tail vein injection. NB508 cells (5x104) expressing luciferase and vector, or Wnt2 in 100 ul of PBS were injected into lateral tail vein of the mice. Tumour formation in the lung was monitored weekly by bioluminescence using IVIS Lumina II (Caliper Life Science). Mice were euthanized after 6 weeks and lungs were sampled. Comparison between groups was performed using t-test.
Tumour Sphere Assay
Cells were plated as single cell suspension in ultralow attachment 6-well or 96-well plates (Corning) and grown in RPMI medium (serum free) supplemented with 20 ul/ml B27 (Invitrogen), 20 ng/ml EGF and 20 ng/ml bFGF. Fresh media (1 ml or 30 ul) was added every 3 days. Tumour spheres were counted and photographed at day 10. Inhibitors were purchased from Sigma and used at 1 uM (for mouse cell lines) and 0.3, 1, and 3 uM (for human cell lines) (5Z-7-Oxozeaenol), 1.8 uM (IWR1), and 1.4 uM (Y-27632). For immuofluorescent staining, tumour spheres were deposited onto a microscope slide by cytospin (Shandon), fixed and stained. Comparison between groups was performed using t-test analysis (number differences) or Wilcoxon analysis (size differences).
Anoikis Assay
Plates were coated with 10 ml of 20 mg/ml poly-HEMA (Sigma) and air-dried. Cells (2x106) were plated on the poly-HEMA coated plates. Cells were collected at different time points and proteins extracted.
Antibodies and Immunoblot Analysis
Antibodies used were b-catenin (BD), activated b-catenin (Millipore), Fibronectin, Wnt2 (Sigma), b-tubulin (Santa Cruz), and cleaved Caspase-3, p-Tak1 (Cell Signaling), and Tak1 (Cell Signaling). Cells were lysed in RIPA lysis buffer [20mM Tris, pH8/150mM NaCl/10mM NaF/0.1% SDS/1% Nonidet P-40/1x protease inhibitor mixture (Roche)]. For conditioned media, Vec-NB508 or Wnt2-NB508 cells were seeded at 1x106 in regular growth media (10% FBS) for 2 days in culture, and culture medium was replaced with low-serum media (0.2% FBS). After 24 hours, conditioned medium was collected and cell debris was removed by centrifugation. Proteins were concentrated using Amico Ultracel 30k column (Millipore) and resuspended in RIPA buffer to detect the Wnt2 protein by immunoblot. Lysates were run on an SDS/4-15% polyacrylamide gel (Bio-Rad) and transferred onto PVDF membranes (Invitrogen), and immunoblots were visualized with a Western Lightning Plus chemiluminescence kit (PerkinElmer). For phospho-Tak1 level, 1ug of protein lysate was immunoprecipitated with Tak1 antibody (Bethyl Laboratories) and blotted with p-Tak1 antibody (Cell Signaling).
SYTO60 Assay
Cells were seeded in 96-well plates in standard growth media at 1,000 cells /well or serum-free media at 5,000 cells /well. Cells were fixed every day after plating and incubated with Syto60 red fluorescence nucleic acid staining (Invitrogen) at 1:8000 dilution in 1xPBS for 30 minutes in the dark. Red fluorescence nucleic acid staining was measured using a plate reader (Molecular Probes).
Transwell Migration and Invasion Assays
Cells (5x104) were seeded on 8-um pore size Transwell filters (Corning) in regular growth media or low-serum media (0.2% FBS). Invasion chambers coated with Matrigel (Corning) were used for invasion assays with cells plated in regular growth media. Two days after seeding, cells on top of the chamber were stripped off with cotton tips and cells on the bottom of the chambers were fixed in 4% PFA and stained with crystal violet.
Real-time qRT-PCR
Total RNA (2 ug) was reverse transcribed using a cDNA synthesis kit (GE Healthcare). Real-time quantitative RT-PCR was performed using SYBR green in an ABI PRISM 7500 sequence detection system with 96-block module and automation accessory (Applied Biosystems). Gapdh was used as an internal control gene. The primers used are shown below: Gapdh: 5'- TGGTGAAGCAGGCATCTGAG -3' and 5'-TGCTGTTGAAGTCGCAGGAG -3'. Etv4: 5'- CGACTCAGATGTCCCTGGAT-3' and 5'- GGAATGGTCGAAGGGATTTT -3'. Mycn: 5'- GATGAGGATGACGAGGAGGA-3' and 5'- ACGCACAGTGATCGTGAAAG -3'. Fn1: 5'-GATAAATCAGCAGTGGGAACGG -3' and 5'-CAAAGCAAGTCTCTTCAGGCTCAG -3'.
TOPflash Assay
Vec or Wnt2-NB508 cells were infected with lentivirus carrying 7TFP construct and selected with puromycin. Cells were plated in 96-well plate at 5x103 cells per well. Small molecule reagents were added into media 1 day after plating and cells were imaged in the IVIS Lumina II (Caliper Life Science) the following day.
Low quantity high throughput qRT-PCR
RNA was isolated from adherent monolayer cells and tumour spheres cultured in non-adherent plate using Qiagen RNeasy kit (Qiagen). Reverse transcription was carried out using 200ng of RNA with SuperScriptIII (Invitrogen) per manufacturer's protocol. Pre-amplification of cDNA was done with 1.25 ul of cDNA using pooled 48 TaqMan Assays at a final concentration of 0.2X for each assay. The pre-amplification PCR was performed at one cycle 95degC for 10 min, 14 cycles at 95degC for 15 sec and then 60degC for 4 min. After pre-amplification PCR, the product was diluted 1:5 with dH2O and stored at -80degC until needed. qPCR was carried out using the 48.48 dynamic array (Fluidigm Corporation, CA, USA) following the manufacturer's protocol.

Supplementary Material
1
