[Abstract, Introduction, Methods, Results, Discussion, Mixed]

Analysis of gene expression on ngn3 gene signaling pathway in endocrine pancreatic cancer. In order to define the undifferentiated transcriptional factors present in neurogenesis of pancreatic b-islet cells, we studied the effect of Pdx1 in embryonic stem cell derived endocrine lineage. There are undifferentiated transcriptional progenitors Pdx1+/Ptf1a+/Cpa1+ tracking the growth of acini, ducts, a and b-islet cells. The upregulated transcriptional factors Pdx1 and ngn3 specify consequences of cell cycle regulation in early gut endocrine cells. The undifferentiated transcriptional factors basic helix loop helix (bHLH) protein regulate Ptf1a+/Cpa1+ in acini, ducts and it also regulate ngn3 to decrease expression of insulin and other pancreas secretions. The Pdx1+ and other unknown gene mutations show abnormal growth of neurogenesis in endocrine lineages. Using microarray based gene expression analysis to determine undifferential gene ontology in tissue specific gene regulation and disease progression that common in both metabolic and biological signaling pathways. The data expression profiles of ngn3 of wild- type pancreatic islet and islet derived tumor stem cells provide information on endocrine specific ngn3 genes. Therefore, 3755 genes were significantly regulated by Ngn3 induced pancreatic islet cell development. Moreover 317 upregulated and 175 downregulated, 757 genes deemed as undifferential expressions in endocrine cell. Furthermore to predict signaling pathways that associates with diabetes is highlighted.

Background
Pancreatic and duodenal homeobox 1 (Pdx1 also known insulin
promoter factor1) gene is a major role in pancreas development
[1].
Eventually Pdx1+ is expressed in epithelial and
mesenchymal cells and helps for development of pancreas buds
[2,
3]. The transcriptional factors Pdx1, SRY, SOX9
[4] and
WNT7 [5]
regulate morphological assessment of embryogenesis
in human pancreas. The initiation of embryogenesis shows gene
conversion is taking place in chromosomes, but it did not affect
to flanking genes (Pyr1 and Col4) located at either side of Pdx-
1+. During mitosis the heterozygous conversion of two Pdx-1
and six Pdx-1+ alleles show mutations show undifferentiated
genes expressions leads to apoptosis [6]. The heterozygous
mutation of pdx1 show many pancreatic associated diseases
including adenocarcinoma and diabetes mellitus
[7].
The development of pancreatic cell neurogenesis is a major part
of organogenesis to differentiate both exocrine and endocrine
tissue to develop acini, ducts, a and b-islet cells [8]. Both tissues
are present in early endoderm epithelium through cell-cell
signaling with mesenchyme that directs a cascade of
transcriptional regulatory events [9]. During early stage
development of epithelial cells is undergo control of pancreasspecific
transcriptional complex ptf1 which binds to nuclear
transcriptional factors bHLH [10] it inhibits Pdx-1+ to form
undifferential growth factors and morphogenesis [11]. Out of
these factors, the bHLH factor neurogenin3 (ngn3) plays a
central role in initiating the differentiation of the pancreatic cells
[12]. Until recently, may intracellular signals that regulate
pancreatic development and function [13], these include
transforming growth factor-b (TGF- b), Notch, Hedgehog,
fibroblast growth factor (FGF), and epidermal growth factor
(EGF) pathways, and investigation of pancreas developmental
biology demands familiarity with these signaling pathways
[14-18].
In early sets of gene expression and differentiation shows
Jack-STAT and notch signaling pathways play a crucial role in
neuronal cell development. The loss of function on premature
endocrine cell differentiation conversely, forced expression of
the Notch intracellular domain (NICD) blocks on endocrine cell
development [19]. The differential expression of notch1 in
pdx1+ epithelial cells suggests that Notch signaling could
inhibit a ngn-neuroD cascade in neurogenesis and thus
differentiate endocrine cells [20].
In this study, we examined the influence of ngn3 on early b-cell
development. The results demonstrate that differential gene
expression on Pdx1 and ngn3 on b-cell proliferation in
embryonic cell development and regulate signaling pathway in
early post transcriptional modifications. Our findings provide
evidence of ngn3 is necessary for activation of pancreatic acini,
ductal and beta cells to develop normal pancreas. Furthermore,
we classified the undifferential genes based on the gene
regulatory network and expression patterns in different tissues
and these genes shows potential drug targets in pancreatic
cancer.

Methodology
In order to study signal transduction and analysis of various
disease mechanisms, we need (i) gene expression
measurements (ii) definitions of signaling pathways and (iii)
drug target identification. The pancreatic cancer gene
expression data analysis helps to provide signaling
transductions which contains information about relation of
neuronal development in pancreatic cancer and target gene
product.
Microarray Raw data searching:
We evaluated all published case control studies and diseased
datasets were selected using GEO (GDS2276) contains 16
datasets of embryonic stem cells were processed for microarray
analysis using Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 GeneChip.
The samples include parental stem cells (1) undifferentiated
with 0 days (2) differentiated for 3 days as embryonic stem cells
without ngn3. (3) 10 days as embryoid bodies. The remaining
samples included tetracycline inducible Ngn3 ESC line selected
from the parental stem cell line (4) after differentiation and
addition of deoxycycline for 3 days without embryoid body
formation (Ngn3 ES3 ON), (5 and 6) after differentiation as
embryoid bodies for 3 days with (Ngn3 EB3 ON) or without
(Ngn3 EB3 OFF) deoxycycline, and (7 and 8) after
differentiation as embryoid bodies for 10 days with (Ngn3 EB10
ON) or without (Ngn3 EB10 OFF) deoxycycline. The ngn3
probe sets were selected from GenBank, dbEST, and RefSeq.
The sequences of clusters were developed from the UniGene
database and then refined by analysis and comparison with a
number of other publicly available databases.
Identification of ngn3 gene expression data:
BioConductor packages used to calculate the processed data.
GCRMA (Gene-Chip Robust Multiarray Average) was used for
signal normalization. Ainv15 ES0 data were defined as the
baseline to generate differential expression values for all
hybridizations. A patient sample pair was excluded from
further analysis since one of the samples did not meet the
quality controls. The microarray data was subsequently
normalized using the Robust Microarray Analysis (RMA)
algorithm. A multiclass analysis of variance was performed to
generate p values for every probe set. To evaluate
transcriptional factors among treatment groups, differentially
expressed genes with expression of at least 2 and not greater
than -2 and p values of not greater than 0.001 were selected
from each group and combined for hierarchical clustering using
a correlation similarity metric, an average clustering method,
and by clustering both rows and columns.
Since the expression data is approximately log normally
distributed, we used the log-transformed data as produced by
the RMA algorithm for all subsequent statistical tests. For
visualization purposes, we centered the log-transformed
expression data by subtracting the average probeset logexpression
values. Probe sets with relatively low expression
(average expression values below 100 Affymetrix units) or with
nearly constant expression values (standard deviation below 50)
were excluded from further consideration. Of the 45101 probe
sets on the mouse430, 18000 were thus retained. An unpaired ttest
was used to determine the probesets (genes) that are
differentially expressed between the normal and the tumor
tissue samples. The first 400 probesets with the lowest t-test pvalues
(corresponding to a p-value cutoff of 9x10-12) were
selected for further analysis. We also used a more stringent
fold-change constraint that excluded the probesets with log-fold
change < 1 (roughly corresponding to a fold change < 2), where
the log-fold change of gene g between classes N ('normal') and
T ('tumor') is defined as:
Log-fc (g, N-T) =log2 g (T) - log2 g (N),
Log2 g(C) = SsiSclog2g (Si)/|C|
The average log-expression value of gene g in the samples Si of
class C.
Also, probe set lists of Ngn3-induced differentially expressed
genes were produced for each differentiation context. The
intersecting probe sets representing "context-independent"
differentially expressed genes were systematically evaluated for
significant enrichment of canonical signaling pathways.
Functional enrichment analyses:
The Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated
Discovery (DAVID) (http://david.abcc.ncifcrf.gov) and
Concept Gen (http://conceptgen.ncibi.org) were used to
identify over-represented biological functions and pathways
among the differentially expressed genes.
Network analysis:
A gene co-citation network of the differentially expressed genes
was generated by using a sentence level co-citation filter. This
network allows visualization of the differentially expressed
genes and their potential associations with each other identified
in the literature. The topology of the network was further
analyzed using the Fast Greedy community structure
identification algorithm, implemented in the Cytoscape plug-in
GLay (http://brainarray.mbni.med.umich.edu/ sugang/glay)
to identify coherent sub networks. Identified sub networks were
subjected to functional enrichment analyses by DAVID to reveal
over-represented biological functions within each subnetwork.

Results & Discussion
The genes over expressed in pancreatic cancer whole tumor
tissue contain a NGN3-beta signature:
We performed an expression analysis of 16 pancreatic parental
stem cells of 1) differentiated (2).undifferentiated (3).
Genetically modied Ngn3 induced stem cells of series of time
intervals (0, 3, and 10 days). Using microarray data analysis of
RNA profiling on genesets was annotated using Affymetrix
Mouse430 2.0 whole-genome chip. We generated datasets on
epithelial cell lines that is capable of Dox-inducible; uniform
expression of Ngn3 at different time points (0, 3days, 10days)
after culture with the site-specific integration of Ngn3 mRNA
into the HPRT1 locus of the Ainv15 ESC line was confirmed
using a genome specific embryoid stem cells. Single-copy
integration of murine Ngn3 datasets was calculated using R and
BioConductor.
The histological analysis confirmed that, the Ngn3 ESC cell
lines was capable of forming tissues specific mRNA from Ngn3
cells. The mRNA samples were pooled, amplified and labeled
before duplicate hybridizations were performed on spotted
(pre-synthesized oligonucleotide) microarrays. The sample sets
contains 45101 probe sets and it was genes in 16 datasets, all the
probe sets were represented on GeneChip Mouse 430(r).
The ngn3 mRNA hybridized data contains two outliers and one
mislabeled sample is identified during the quality assessment
process. The data sets along with the appropriate controls were
clustered based on genome-wide gene expression in each
treatment group. The mRNA probes were hybridized with
simultaneous measurement of the relative expression levels of
thousands of individual genes. For the RNA probes with
parental embryoid stem cells and ngn3 induced embryoid stem
cell processed shows more degradation is present, the 95%. For
the degraded samples, the 95% confidence intervals exclude 1
for all but normal parental cell with high amount of
degradation of Affymetrix Mouse430 2.0 when log2 GC% was
used for adjusting probe affinity, suggesting more RNA quality,
again as expected. Also note that the point estimates of the 3'/5 '
ratios for all nine higher-quality GeneChip are much higher
than the point estimates of their corresponding GeneChip with
good quality, as expected.
Ngn3 regulation of gene expression in pancreatic cell line:
Analysis of ngn3 gene expression results is identifying the most
relevant pancreas developmental context led to microarray
analysis of gene expression after induction of Ngn3 from EB7 to
EB10 (Ngn3 EB10 ON). To evaluate Ngn3 expression in
homogenous and pluripotent cellular context, using gene
expression of induction of Ngn3 in undifferentiated ESCs either
in conjunction with EB formation for 3 days (Ngn3 EB3 ON).
The changes of gene expression were described based on
representation changes between parental undifferentiated
embryonic stem cells (n=2), differentiated embryoid bodies
(n=2) embryoid bodies of parental stem cell (n=4), embryoid
bodies of 3 days and 10 days differentiation (n=8) groups
Table 1 (see the supplementary material).
In probesets contains 45101 genes, using normalization
techniques after hybridization shows ~32691 genes will express
in all datasets, using clustering technique shows in murine stem
cells shows less expression in during embryogenesis and
induced ngn3 in stem cells shows more expression. Among
them, 3755 genes were identified as significantly regulated by
GCRMA of differentially expressed probes sets in induced ngn3
to genetically modified embryonic stem cells and 1282 genes
were identified in GCRMA Normalized signal ratio of probe
sets of regulated ESC on Tissue /cell lines data. Out of these
317 genes were significantly upregulated 175 genes
differentially down regulated in ngn3 induced ESCs
Table 2 (see supplementary material).
In probe sets contains 45101 genes, using normalization
techniques after hybridization shows ~32691 genes will express
in all datasets, using clustering technique shows in murine stem
cells shows less expression in during embryogenesis and
induced ngn3 in stem cells shows more expression. Among
them, 3755 genes were identified as significantly regulated by
GCRMA of differentially expressed probes sets in induced ngn3
to genetically modified embryonic stem cells and 1282 genes
were identified in GCRMA Normalized signal ratio of probe
sets of regulated ESC on Tissue /cell lines data. Out of these
317 genes were significantly upregulated 175 genes
differentially down regulated in ngn3 induced ESCs.
(Figure 1)
Based on functional analysis of upregulated and down
regulated genes includes Pdx1cre, LSL-KrasG12D PRRX1A and
PRRX1B, SOX9 and CK19 are transient requirement during
endocrine cell differentiation. The most relevant pancreas
oriented ngn3 expression with endoderm genes Soc17 and
FoxA2 and pancreatic endoderm and endocrine development
Pdx1 and ngn3. Based on gene cluster, the clusters of 0days is
unique in down regulation and 3 and 10 days datasets of
functional characters were presented in (Figure 2 &
Figure 3).
The pancreas-specific gene Ptf1a, Sox17, FoxA2, Pdx1, and
Ngn3 mRNA increased in early EB formation suggests that
ngn3 induced ESC line helps for endoderm development
(Figure 4).
Functional enrichment:
Functional enrichment analyses of the 1216 differentially
expressed genes were performed to identify over-represented
biological functions using Gene Ontology terms and pathways
Table 3 (see supplementary material).
Analysis of ngn3 induced signaling pathways:
Based on literature and microarray techniques, we analyzed the
genes present in gene networks of the differentially expressed
genes was created by Cytoscape based on sentence level cocitations
of differentially expressed genes to examine their
potential relationships. This network is composed of
subnetworks centered on the nine most connected genes
Table 4
(see supplementary material). The transcriptional factors
Casq1,NeuroG3,Trp53bp1,PrkCi,4933426M11Rik, 33426M11Rik,
Taf1, Znhit1, and A230108P19Rik. The complete network was
further analyzed by Fast Greedy algorithm, implemented in the
Cytoscape plug-in GLay, to cluster the genes into subgroups
based on their network structure. 41 clusters with a minimum
of 317 genes were identified (Figure 5 &
Figure 6)

Conclusion
We analyzed differential gene expression patterns present in
ngn3 induced ESCs on neurogenesis and post translational
modifications in different signaling cascades. Total of 3755
genes is functional gene expression, with these 317 genes shows
positive up regulation and 175 genes negative down regulation
in embryogenesis. 176 genes involved in notch signaling
pathway helps to differentiate tissues in both exocrine and
endocrine, our gene classification results shows that, the
functionally enriched gene functions may express acini, ductal
and b-cells. In functional network analysis shows 19 functional
genes is used as regulator in notch signaling pathway and it is
potentially used for drug targets.

Supplementary material
Data 1
