[Abstract, Introduction, Methods, Results, Discussion, Discussion]

Knockdown of Snail Sensitizes Pancreatic Cancer Cells to Chemotherapeutic Agents and Irradiation. The prognosis of patients with pancreatic cancer remains poor; only patients with small tumors and complete resection have a chance of a complete cure. Pancreatic cancer responds poorly to conventional therapies, including chemotherapy and irradiation. Snail is a transcription factor that has been associated with anti-apoptotic and chemoresistant properties in pancreatic cancer cells. In this study, we investigated whether knockdown of Snail suppresses growth of and/or sensitizes pancreatic cancer cells to chemotherapeutic agents and irradiation through induction of apoptosis. An adeno-associated virus vector was used to deliver Snail siRNA and knockdown Snail expression in untreated pancreatic cancer cells and in pancreatic cancer cells treated with chemotherapeutic agents or g-irradiation. Our data indicate that our adeno-associated virus vector can efficiently deliver Snail siRNA into PANC-1 cells both in vitro and in vivo, resulting in the knockdown of Snail expression at the mRNA and protein levels. We further show that knockdown of Snail expression results in potent growth suppression of pancreatic cancer cells and suppresses xenograft tumor growth in vivo through induction of apoptosis. Finally, knockdown of Snail expression significantly sensitizes pancreatic cancer cells to chemotherapeutic agents and g-irradiation through induction of apoptosis. In conclusion, our findings indicate that Snail is an important modulator of therapeutic responses of pancreatic cancer cells and is potentially useful as a sensitizer in pancreatic cancer therapy.

1.
Introduction
Pancreatic cancer is a disease with a high mortality rate and short survival, as a result of the high incidence of metastatic disease at diagnosis, the fulminant clinical course and a lack of successful therapeutic strategies. In addition, the administration of chemotherapeutic agents and irradiation for the treatment of advanced disease has failed [1-3].
Cancer development is a multistage process which involves a number of genetic and epigenetic changes in the genes controlling cell survival, cell death, cell-cell communication, cell-microenvironment interactions and angiogenesis [4-7]. It has become increasingly clear that abnormalities in cell death pathways play an important role in tumorigenesis and the development of resistance to chemotherapy and radiation therapy [8,9]. The majority of the agents used in cancer therapy directly or indirectly damage DNA thereby inducing apoptosis. However, defects in the apoptotic machinery can lead to multidrug resistance [10-12]. Therapeutic manipulation of apoptotic pathways has become an attractive target to improve the clinical response of pancreatic cancer patients [13,14].
Recently, much attention has been focused on the epithelial-mesenchymal transition [EMT], a key event of embryogenesis that is observed in tumor cells and is associated with increased malignancy [15]. EMT is essential for the formation of different tissues and organs during embryonic development [16]. However, in adult tissue, EMT is inhibited to maintain epithelial integrity and homeostasis. Aberrant activation of EMT in epithelial tumors usually correlates with the development and recurrence of neoplasms [17]. Several transcription factors have been implicated in the transcriptional repression of the epithelial marker E-cadherin, including zinc-finger proteins of the Snail/Slug family, Twist, ZEB1, SIP1, and the basic helix-loop-helix factor E12/E47. Snail was the first and most important transcriptional repressor of E-cadherin to be described. Snail was identified in Drosophila as a suppressor of shotgun (an E-cadherin homolog) transcription and a regulator of embryogenesis [18,19]. Snail has a central role in morphogenesis, as it is essential for the formation of the mesoderm and neural crest, which requires large-scale cell movements in organisms ranging from flies to mammals. Absence of Snail is lethal due to severe defects at the gastrula stage during development [20]. The fundamental role of Snail in EMT and breast cancer metastasis involves suppression of E-cadherin expression. In fact, overexpression of Snail was recently found in invasive breast cancer, hepatocarcinoma and pancreatic cancer [21-23]. Furthermore, the expression of Snail in tumor cells is associated with metastasis, tumor recurrence and poor prognosis [21-24].
A few studies have focused on the role of Snail during the development of chemoresistance to anti-cancer agents in cancer cells. A recent report suggested that Snail may enhance chemoresistance of pancreatic cancer cells to 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) or gemcitabine [25]. In addition, it has found by Zhuo et al. [26] that Snail depletion sensitizes A549 lung cancer cells to cisplatin, suggesting a critical role for Snail in chemoresistance to cisplatin and raising the possibility of Snail depletion as a promising approach to lung cancer therapy.
The purpose of this study was to determine whether suppression of Snail could increase sensitivity of PANC-1 cells to the chemotherapeutic agents, 5-FU and gemcitabine, as well as g-irradiation. RNA interference was employed to knockdown Snail expression in PANC-1 cells, and cell viability and apoptosis in response to 5-FU or gemcitabine and g-irradiation were further assessed. Here, we identify a role for Snail in resistance to chemotherapy and g-irradiation in pancreatic cancer cells.

2.
Materials and Methods
2.1.
Mice and Cells
Female Nude mice (6-8 weeks of age) were purchased from the Shanghai Animal Center and housed in our pathogen-free animal facilities. The animal experiments were carried out in accordance with the Guidelines for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals and the institutional guidelines. The human pancreatic cancer cell line PANC-1 was obtained from the American Type Culture Collection (Manassas, VA, U.S.) and was maintained in Dulbecco's Modified Eagle's Medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, penicillin (100 U/mL) and streptomycin (100 U/mL) at 37 degC in an atmosphere of 5% CO2.
2.2.
Construction of the Adeno-Associated Virus Vectors and Production of Viral Particles
siRNA-Snail adeno-associated virus or siRNA-mock adeno-associated virus (rAAV2-siRNA-Snail or rAAV2-siRNA-mock) were generated using the pSilencer(tm) 2. 1-U6 neo plasmid vectors (Ambion, Austin, TX, U.S.). We generated two different siRNA vectors [26]. The following sequences were successfully constructed: siRNA-Snail sense: 5'-GAT CCG CCT AAC TAC AGC GAG CTG TTC AAG AGA CAG CTC GCT GTA GTT AGG CTT TTT TGG AAA-3', and antisense: 5'-AGC TTT TCC AAA AAA GCC TAA CTA CAG CGA GCT GTC TCT TGA ACA GCT CGC TGT AGT TAG GCG-3'. The sequence was submitted to a BLAST search against the human genome sequence to ensure that only the Snail gene was targeted. The following unrelated nonspecific scrambled oligonucleotide was used as the control: sense: 5'-GAT CCG TAT TGC CTA GCA TTA CGT TTC AAG AGA ACG TAA TGC TAG GCA ATA CTT TTT TGG AAA-3', and antisense: 5'-AGC TTT TCC AAA GTA TTG CCT AGC ATT ACG TTC TCT TGA AAC GTA ATG CTA GGC AAT ACG-3'. This siRNA sequence does not match any mammalian sequences currently available in online databases. The siRNA-Snail and siRNA-mock were cloned into the pGCL-GFP vector. The pGCL-GFP vectors with siRNA-Snail or siRNA-mock inserts were used as entry clone vectors and transferred into the vector pDC316-EGFP-U6 (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, U.S.) using the Gateway BamHI and HindIII enzyme mix according to the manufacturer's directions (Invitrogen) to generate pSNAV2-EGFP-siRNA-Snail-U6 or pSNAV2-EGFP-siRNA-mock-U6. The vectors were linearized with PacI enzyme and transfected into the 293A cell line using Lipofectamine 2000 reagent according to the manufacturer's directions. The 293A cells were maintained in DMEM until a cytopathic effect was apparent 5-7 days post-transfection. Cells were collected and lysed by subjecting them to four freeze/thaw cycles. The cell debris was pelleted at 3000 rpm for 15 minutes and the supernatant was stored at -80 degC as crude viral lysate. Fifty microliters of crude viral lysate were added into each 293A cell culture dish and incubated for 2-3 days until an 80-100% cytopathic effect was observed. The rAAV2-siRNA-Snail or rAAV2-siRNA-mock were harvested and purified using the adeno-associated virus Mini Purification Kit according to the manufacturer's directions (Clontech, Mountain View, CA, USA) and stored at -80 degC. Titers of rAAV2-siRNA-Snail or rAAV2- siRNA-mock stocks were determined using an adeno-associated virus Rapid Titer Kit according to the manufacturer's directions (Clontech).
2.3.
Evaluation of Transfection Efficiencies
After transfection of rAAV2-siRNA-mock (MOIs: 250, 100, 25, 5) for 48 h, the proportion of EGFP-expressing cells was measured by fluorescence microscope according to the manufacturer's instruction, to give the transfection efficiency.
2.4.
Drug Treatment
The anticancer drugs 5-FU and gemcitabine used in the study were purchased from Sigma (St. Louis, MO, USA). The drugs were dissolved in DMSO and diluted to appropriate concentrations with cell culture media. PANC-1 cells were exposed to g-irradiation at 6 Gy. For combination treatments, cells were infected with rAAV2-siRNA-Snail or rAAV2-siRNA-mock for 24 hours prior to drug treatment or g-irradiation.
2.5.
In Vitro Induction of Apoptosis and Growth Assays
After treatment, attached and floating cells were harvested and analyzed for apoptosis by nuclear staining with Annexin V/propidium iodide (PI). A minimum of 300 cells were analyzed for each treatment. The PI-stained cells were analyzed by flow cytometry. Cell growth was measured using an MTT assay in 96-well plates (2,500 cells per well) using the Cell Titer 96 AQueous One Solution (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) following the manufacturer's instructions. A490 nm was measured using a Victor III (Perkin-Elmer/Wallace, USA) plate reader. Each experiment was carried out in triplicate and repeated at least twice.
2.6.
Hoechst 33342 and PI Staining
After treatment, cells were trypsinized, fixed in 1% paraformaldehyde in PBS on ice for 15 minutes, suspended in ice cold ethanol -20 degC. Microscopic detection of apoptosis and necrosis was carried out in both floating and adherent cells recovered after treatment using nuclear chromatin staining with 1 mg/mL Hoechst 33342 and 1 mg/mL propidium iodide for 15 minutes at 37 degC. Quantitative analysis of staining was obtained by counting the frequency of Hoechst-positive cells per optical field.
2.7.
Western Blotting
Whole-cell proteins were isolated with the use of RIPA buffer (150 mmol/L NaCl, 0.5% deoxycholic acid, 0.1% SDS, 1% NP 40, 50 mmol/L TRIS [pH 8.0], with protease inhibitors 0.5 mg/mL aprotinin, 0.1 mg/mL leupeptin, 0.5 mg/mL pepstatin, and 1 mmol/L PMSF), sonicated for 10 seconds (Virtis; An Sp Inc, Gardiner, NY, USA), and incubated on ice for 20 minutes. Lysates were centrifuged at 16, 000 g at 4 degC for 30 minutes and the supernatant was collected and stored at -70 degC. The protein concentration was measured at 595 nm using the Bradford assay reagent (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Inc, Hercules, CA, USA). 30 mg of total protein was loaded per well, separated by 7.5% to 12% SDS-PAGE and transferred to polyvinylidene difluoride membranes (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Inc.) at 150 mA for 16 hours at 4 degC. The membranes were blocked with 5% nonfat milk in 0.1% Tween-20 in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and incubated with primary antibodies against Snail (rabbit polyclonal, 1:1500; Oncogene Sciences, San Diego, CA, USA) and b-actin (mouse monoclonal, 1:1000; Zymed, San Francisco, CA, USA) in 0.1% Tween-20 in PBS. The membranes were rinsed twice with 0.1% Tween 20 in PBS for 15 minutes, then incubated with horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated goat anti-mouse IgG antibody (1:5000, Oncogene Sciences, San Diego, CA, USA) and HRP-conjugated donkey anti-rabbit IgG antibody (1:5000) for 1 hour at room temperature. Membranes were then washed 3 times with 0.1% Tween-20 in PBS for 15 minutes. Immunoblots were detected using an electrochemiluminescence kit (Amersham, Piscataway, NJ, USA) and exposed to X-OMAT AR film (Kodak, Rochester, NY, USA).
2.8.
RNA Isolation and RT-PCR
Total RNA was extracted from cells using the TRIzol reagent (Life Technologies, San Diego, CA, U.S.) following the manufacturer's instructions. 2 mg of total RNA was used for synthesis of cDNAs by reverse transcription (cDNA Synthesis Kit, Invitrogen) following the manufacturer's instructions. cDNA was amplified using 1 mL of the reaction products in 25 mL with 10 pmol of each primer for 35 cycles. Each cycle consisted of 30 seconds of denaturation at 94 degC, 30 seconds of annealing at 65 degC and 60 seconds of extension at 72 degC. The primers used for cDNA amplification included: Snail forward, 5'-TTC CAG CAG CCC TAC GAC CAG-3' and reverse, 5'-CGG ACT CTT GGT GCT TGT GGA-3'; and b-actin forward, 5'-CAA CTG GGA CGA CAT GGA GA-3' and reverse 5'-CAG GCA GCT CGT AGC TCT TC-3'. b-actin was used as the internal control in all reactions.
2.9.
In Vivo Tumor Study
All animal experiments were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at the University of Qingdao. Xenograft tumors were established by s.c. injection of 4 x 106 PANC-1 cells into the flanks of 6- to 8-week-old female Nude mice. Tumor treatment was initiated by injecting each tumor (50-100 mm3) with rAAV2-siRNA-Snail or rAAV2-siRNA-mock (1 x 109 plaque-forming units in 50 mL of PBS). Each treatment was repeated twice. Tumor growth was monitored three times per week using calipers to calculate tumor volumes according to the formula [length x width2]/2.
2.10.
In Vivo Apoptosis Detection
Apoptosis was evaluated by terminal transferase dUTP nick end labeling (TUNEL) staining using the Apoptag Peroxidase In Situ Detection Kit S7100 (Chemicon) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Briefly, histological sections were deparaffinized, hydrated in deionized water, then rinsed with PBS. The sections were treated with 20 mg/mL of proteinase K for 15 minutes to digest protein, and with 3% H2O2 for 5 minutes to quench endogenous peroxidase activity. After washing with PBS, the equilibration buffer was added. The slides were then treated with working strength TdT enzyme for 60 minutes at 37 degC. Subsequently, the sections were incubated with preheated working strength Stop solution for 10 minutes, followed by peroxidase conjugated anti-digoxigenin for 30 minutes. The signal was detected with Pierce Metal Enhanced 3,3'-diaminobenzidine (DAB) and the sections were counterstained with methyl green (Vector stock solution) or Mayer's hematoxylin and then mounted. Control slides were ordered from Serologicals Corporation. The results were obtained using an optical microscope. The percentage of apoptotic cells was calculated as the number of apoptotic cells per number of total cells x 100%.
2.11.
In Vivo Immunohistochemistry
Frozen sections from Xenograft tumors were consecutively cut into 4-6-mm thick sections for H&E staining for routine histological analysis and for immunohistochemical studies. The immunohistochemical staining was carried out using the Histostain-SP kit (Zymed). The primary antibody was polyclonal anti-Snail antibody (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA, USA) (dilution 1:100). Briefly, after deparaffinization and rehydration, the sections were boiled in 0.01 mol/L citrate buffer pH 6.0 for 15 minutes in a microwave oven. Then sections were immersed in 3% hydrogen peroxide in methanol for 10 minutes to block the endogenous peroxidase activity and incubated with serum blocking solution to block nonspecific binding. The sections were incubated with primary antibody at 4 degC overnight, followed by incubation with biotinylated secondary antibody and enzyme conjugate. Staining was developed by addition of DAB chromogen. The sections were counterstained with hematoxylin. The results of the immunostaining were assessed microscopically by two pathologists. Snail-expressing cells within the tumors were counted and the proportion of Snail-positive cells to total tumor cells was calculated.
2.12.
Statistical Analysis
P values were calculated by Student's t test or two-way ANOVA using SPSS10.0 software. The mean +- SD are shown in the figures. P < 0.05 was considered to be statistically significant.

3.
Results
3.1.
Adeno-Associated Virus Vector Effectively Delivers Snail-siRNA into Cultured PANC-1 Cells
Two adeno-associated virus vectors rAAV2-siRNA-Snail and rAAV2-siRNA-mock that contained the GFP gene as a control were constructed. PANC-1 cells were infected with rAAV2-siRNA-Snail viral particles with different multiplicity of infections (MOIs). The infection efficiencies at the following MOIs: 250, 100, 25, 5 and 0 for 48 hours were 86%, 75%, 26%, 18% and 0%, respectively (Figure 1). Snail expression was detected by RT-PCR and Western blotting analysis. Both assays demonstrated not only a reduction in Snail gene expression in the infected cells, but also showed a clear dose-dependent repression of Snail protein expression (Tables 1-2).
3.2.
Knockdown of Snail Significantly Suppresses Growth of PANC-1 Cancer Cells through Induction of Apoptosis
The anti-apoptotic function of Snail (25) prompted us to investigate whether knockdown of Snail suppresses pancreatic cancer cell growth. PANC-1 cells were infected with rAAV2-siRNA-Snail or rAAV2-siRNA-mock resulting in at least 70% infection as indicated by the GFP signal. After 48 hours, cells were analyzed using the MTT assay. rAAV2-siRNA-Snail was found to cause significant growth suppression in PANC-1 cells (P = 0.0025), whereas rAAV2-siRNA-mock had virtually no effect on cell growth compared to the untreated cells (P = 0.337; Figure 2A). An increased frequency of cells infected by rAAV2-siRNA-Snail, but not by rAAV2-siRNA-mock, underwent apoptosis as demonstrated by Hoechst 33342 and PI staining and Annexin V/PI expression (Figures 2B, C). These data show that Snail knockdown leads to growth suppression and induction of apoptosis in PANC-1 cancer cells.
3.3.
Knockdown of Snail Sensitizes PANC-1 Cancer Cells to Chemotherapeutic Agents and g-Irradiation
Abnormalities in the regulation of apoptosis have been shown to contribute to the development of resistance to chemotherapy and radiation therapy in cancer cells [27,28]. The important anti-apoptotic function of Snail suggests that downregulated Snail expression may restore sensitivity of cancer cells to anticancer agents. To test this hypothesis, PANC-1 cells were treated with a low dose of rAAV2 siRNA-Snail (5 MOI) alone or in combination with g-irradiation or chemotherapeutic agents, including 5-FU and gemcitabine. rAAV2-siRNA-Snail was found to significantly enhance the growth inhibitory effects of these chemotherapeutic drugs and g-irradiation (Figures 3A, C and D). For example, up to a 6-7-fold increase in growth suppression was achieved when rAAV2-siRNA-Snail was combined with 5-FU (Figure 3B). We also determined the IC50 values of the chemotherapeutic agents in PANC-1 cells with or without rAAV2-siRNA-Snail and found that rAAV2-siRNA-Snail significantly lowered the IC50s of these agents by 4-fold (gemcitabine) to more than 10-fold (5-FU; Table 3). These results show that knockdown of Snail significantly sensitizes PANC-1 cells to chemotherapeutic agents.
We next determined whether knockdown of Snail sensitizes PANC-1 cells to these anticancer agents through induction of apoptosis. PANC-1 cells are resistant to apoptosis induced by 5-FU (up to 5 mg/mL) and g-irradiation (up to 6 Gy, data not shown). rAAV2-siRNA-Snail (10 MOI) infected cells and 5-FU (0.5 mg/mL) treated cells alone did not induce significant apoptosis in PANC-1 cells (Figure 4A). However, almost 70% of cells underwent apoptosis following 72 hours of the combination treatment (Figure 3A). Similarly, a combination of g-irradiation (6 Gy) with rAAV2-siRNA-Snail led to a markedly enhanced apoptotic response in PANC-1 cells (Figure 3E). In contrast, the control rAAV2-siRNA-mock had no effect on apoptosis when combined with 5-FU or g-irradiation (Figures 3E,F). Analysis of apoptosis levels using Hoechst 33342 and PI staining confirmed these results (data not shown). These results show that knockdown of Snail promoted apoptosis induced by 5-FU or g-irradiation.
3.4.
Knockdown of Snail Suppresses Tumor Growth in Vivo
To determine whether the knockdown of Snail confers antitumor activity in vivo, PANC-1 xenograft tumors (~50-100 mm3) were treated with three injections of rAAV2-siRNA-Snail and the control rAAV2-siRNA-mock at 1 x 109 plaque-forming units (Figure 4A). rAAV2-siRNA-mock did not have any effect on tumor growth compared with PBS alone, with tumors reaching eight-times their initial volume in 21 days (Figures 4 A). In contrast, tumors subjected to rAAV2-siRNA-Snail treatment grew much slower and reached less than twice their initial volume, with approximately 80% growth suppression compared to tumors treated with rAAV2-siRNA-mock (P < 0.01; Figures 4A). We analyzed tumor histology by H&E staining, Snail protein expression by immunohistochemistry and in situ apoptosis by TUNEL. We found that Snail protein expression was inhibited significantly in rAAV2-siRNA-Snail treated tumors (Figure 4B). These data show that knockdown of Snail can effectively inhibit growth of established tumors in vivo through induction of apoptosis.

4.
Discussion
In addition to its role as an inducer of EMT and cell migration, Snail is considered to be a critical factor in cell survival [29]. When stably expressed in epithelial cells, Snail confers resistance to cell death induced by withdrawal of growth factors and by pro-apoptotic signals [30]. Aberrant expression of Snail may also promote resistance to programmed cell death elicited by DNA damage [31]. Pancreatic cancer is a malignancy that resists nearly all present chemotherapeutic strategies. Yin et al. [25] reported that expression of Snail not only confers the invasive phenotype to pancreatic cancer cells, but also promotes chemoresistance. Therefore, in this study, we have used a pancreatic cell line, PANC-1 to examine whether knockdown of Snail suppresses growth of pancreatic cancer cells and/or sensitizes pancreatic cancer cells to chemotherapeutic agents and irradiation.
We first examined the efficiency of adeno-associated virus transduction and the effect of MOI on the expression level of Snail in pancreatic cancer cells in vitro using RT-PCR and Western blotting. We found that the expression of Snail in PANC-1 cells after knockdown by adeno-associated virus vectors is clearly viral particle dose-dependent. Higher MOIs resulted in a marked decrease in the expression level of Snail protein and mRNA.
We also demonstrated that knockdown of Snail via adeno-associated viruses resulted in apoptosis and enhanced sensitivity to chemotherapeutic agents and g-irradiation, suggesting that Snail knockdown is crucial for triggering apoptotic responses to these agents. Interestingly, knockdown of Snail seems to be the most effective in enhancing growth suppression and apoptosis when combined with 5-FU, gemcitabine or g-irradiation, consistent with the notion that Snail plays a critical role in DNA damage-induced apoptosis [26]. These observations suggest that knockdown of Snail sensitizes pancreatic cancer cells to chemotherapeutic agents and irradiation, and warrants further evaluation.
We also investigated the in vivo therapeutic effect of adeno-associated virus-mediated Snail siRNA knockdown by intratumoral injections of viruses. Our results show that on average, tumors treated with rAAv-siRNA-Snail were 42% smaller than mock-treated tumors. Tumor volumes of the rAAv-siRNA-Snail treated group were significantly smaller on day 21 (P < 0.01) than the other groups. This reduction in tumor size can be attributed to increased apoptosis in tumors treated with rAAv-siRNA-Snail.

5.
Conclusion
We successfully down-regulated Snail expression in PANC-1 cells using adeno-associated Snail siRNA vectors, resulting in increased 5-FU, gemcitabine or g-irradiation-induced PANC-1 cell apoptosis. These results suggest that appropriate chemotherapeutic or radiation therapies concomitant with Snail depletion might be a promising approach to treat pancreatic cancer.
