[Abstract, Introduction, Methods, Results, Discussion]

A spheroid-based 3-D culture model for pancreatic
cancer drug testing, using the acid phosphatase assay. Current therapy for pancreatic cancer is multimodal, involving surgery and chemotherapy. However, development of pancreatic cancer therapies requires a thorough evaluation of drug efficacy in vitro before animal testing and subsequent clinical trials. Compared to two-dimensional culture of cell monolayer, three-dimensional (3-D) models more closely mimic native tissues, since the tumor microenvironment established in 3-D models often plays a significant role in cancer progression and cellular responses to the drugs. Accumulating evidence has highlighted the benefits of 3-D in vitro models of various cancers. In the present study, we have developed a spheroid-based, 3-D culture of pancreatic cancer cell lines MIAPaCa-2 and PANC-1 for pancreatic drug testing, using the acid phosphatase assay. Drug efficacy testing showed that spheroids had much higher drug resistance than monolayers. This model, which is characteristically reproducible and easy and offers rapid handling, is the preferred choice for filling the gap between monolayer cell cultures and in vivo models in the process of drug development and testing for pancreatic cancer.

Introduction
Pancreatic cancer has a poor prognosis. For about the last 10 years, gemcitabine has
remained the first-line chemotherapeutic agent for advanced pancreatic cancer;
however, the success of drug treatment is poor, and overall survival has not
improved for decades. Drug resistance is thought to be a major reason for the
limited benefit of most pancreatic cancer therapies. Increasing drug efficiency and
decreasing drug resistance are current principal aims in pancreatic cancer research
(1).
The most common drug model for in vitro study of cancer cells is the
monolayer culture of cells. Although the two-dimensional (2-D) model has made
significant contributions to cancer research, it has certain intrinsic limitations
that have promoted the development of three-dimensional (3-D) culture models.
Compared to 2-D culture models, 3-D culture models can provide a microenvironment
that more closely mimics the microenvironment observed in tumor tissues. This
feature is crucial for drug testing, since environmental cues can have profound
effects on properties, behaviors, and functions of cancer cells, which may in turn
affect cellular responses to drugs (2-4). Thus, 3-D culture models offer a more
sophisticated means of mimicking in vivo environments, including
the control of concentration gradients of signaling molecules and therapeutic
agents, composition and structure of extracellular matrix surrounding the cancer
cells, and the morphology and arrangement of individual cells.
Multicellular spheroids are probably the most widely accepted model for 3-D culture
(5). Several studies have highlighted the
potential of multicellular tumor spheroids (MCTS) in cancer research and treatment
(6-12). Multicellular spheroid cultures can reflect the tumor
microenvironment, volume growth kinetics, and cytoarchitecture, similar to those of
avascular tumor nodules, micrometastasis, or the intervascular region of large,
solid tumors. Previous research has studied MCTS-based drug screening in various
types of tumors (13 (14). MCTS in pancreatic cancer were first described by McLeod
(15). However, MCTS remain poorly
investigated in spheroid-based chemotherapy research.
In the present study, a spheroid-based 3-D culture model of MIAPaCa-2 and PANC-1
MCTS, using the acid phosphatase assay, was established to investigate the
chemotherapy characteristics of pancreatic cancer cells. As an important supplement
to monolayer-based assays, well-controlled MCTS may provide new insights and a
better estimation of antitumor efficacy for pancreatic cancer drug testing.

Material and Methods
Cell lines and spheroid culture
The MIAPaCa-2 and PANC-1 human pancreatic cancer cells were the kind gift of
Professor Helmut Friess at the Department of Surgery, Klinikum Rechts der Isar,
Technische Universitat Munchen, Germany. Cells were thawed from frozen stock and
subcultured for <20 passages. Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (DMEM)
containing 1 g/L glucose, 1% (w/v) sodium pyruvate, 1% (w/v) L-glutamine, and
3.7% (w/v) NaHCO3, supplemented with 100 U/mL penicillin, 100 ug/mL
streptomycin, and 10% fetal calf serum (FCS), was used for culturing (HyClone,
USA). All cultures were kept at 37degC in a humidified atmosphere with 5%
CO2. Cell transfer and preparation of single-cell suspensions
were performed by mild enzymatic dissociation, using 0.05% trypsin and 0.02%
EDTA in phosphate-buffered saline (HyClone). Spheroids were initiated in a
liquid overlay by seeding 1.2x103 MIAPaCa-2 cells and
1.0x103 PANC-1 cells/well in 200 uL medium using agarose-coated,
96-well culture plates (50 uL 1.5% agarose/well). After an initiation interval
of 4 days, 50% of supernatant was replaced with fresh medium, repeated every 48
h thereafter except for a 72 h drug treatment setup described in the drug
treatment section.
Cell counting, flow cytometry, and microscopy
For the detection of viable cells, 15 to 30 spheroids were collected and
dissociated using a spheroid dispersion solution (SCIVAX, Inc., USA), and the
cell number was counted with a NucleoCounter (Chemometec, Denmark). Cell
aliquots were stained with the DNA intercalating dye propidium iodide (PI, 2
ug/mL per 106 cells), and the cells were analyzed on an Accuri C6
Flow Cytometer using CFlow Plus software packages (Accuri Cytometers, Inc.,
USA).
Morphological analyses of spheroids and phase contrast imaging in 96-well
microplates were carried out manually on a DM IL inverted phase-contrast
microscope (Leica, Germany). The volumes of the spheroids were calculated as
previously described (16
17). Generated data tables contained the
following morphometric information: maximum diameter (d1), the
diameter at right angles to maximum diameter (d2), mean
spheroid diameter (D), and spheroid volume. Volumes were
calculated with the AVD mass and volume calculator 7.2.1 (Avlan Design, Canada).
Briefly, d1 and d2 were measured and recorded.
D was calculated using the formula . Spheroid
volume (mm3) was calculated using the formula .
Acid phosphatase assay
A modified acid phosphatase (APH) assay, which was based on quantification of
cytosolic APH activity, was validated for determining viable cells in spheroids
(18). Intracellular APH in viable
cells hydrolyzed p-nitrophenyl phosphate to
p-nitrophenol. Its absorbance at 405 nm was directly
proportional to the cell number in the range of 103 to 105
cells/monolayer. MCTS cultures grown in liquid overlay were transferred with
supernatant onto flat-bottom, 96-well microplates and centrifuged for 10 min at
1500 g to spin down spheroids, clusters, and single cells. The
pellet was washed by carefully replacing 160 uL of supernatant with phosphate
buffer solution (PBS). Centrifugation was repeated, and the supernatant was
discarded to a final volume of 100 uL. Then, 100 uL of assay buffer was added
per well and incubated for 90 min at 37degC. Following incubation, 10 uL NaOH was
added to each well, and absorbance at 405 nm was measured within 10 min with a
WellScan MK3 microplate reader (Labsystems Dragon, Finland).
Drug treatment
Treatment was performed with 5-fluorouracil (5-FU, Sigma-Aldrich, USA) and
gemcitabine hydrochloride (Eli Lilly and Company, USA). Drugs (100 mM stock
solutions in dimethyl sulfoxide) were applied in the following concentrations:
200, 100, 50, 25, 10, 1, 0.1, and 0.01 uM, in culture medium. Treatment with 10%
Triton-X-100 (Sigma-Aldrich) in culture medium for 1.5 h at 37degC led to a 100%
loss of cell membrane integrity in structurally intact spheroids, and served as
positive control. For treatment, MIAPaCa-2 and PANC-1 monolayer cultures were
grown in 96-well plates by plating 5x102 exponentially growing cells
per well. Spheroids were grown in liquid overlay, as described above. Both
monolayer and spheroid cultures were treated for 96 h after inoculation by
replacing 50% (100 uL) of the culture supernatant with drug-supplemented fresh
medium. The spheroid diameter at the onset of treatment was 370 to 410 um. The
treatment interval was 72 h. Untreated control cells and spheroids were always
cultured in parallel, using 100 uL dimethyl sulfoxide-containing medium for the
drug dilution.
Analysis of drug efficacy
Drug effects were documented after 72 h of treatment via the APH assay and
spheroid volume analysis. All experiments were carried out in triplicate. APH
data were corrected for background absorption at 405 nm. Drug effects were
recorded relative to untreated controls, using the mean APH signal of untreated
spheroids (n=9) measured for each individual experiment.
Statistical analysis
Dose-response curves and IC50 values were calculated for each
individual experiment by sigmoidal dose-response analysis, using the Hill
fitting equation in the Prism 5 software (GraphPad Software, Inc., USA). The
individual dose-response curves and IC50 values for each drug were
averaged, and are reported as means+-SD.

Results
Characteristics of MIAPaCa-2 and PANC-1 pancreatic cancer spheroids
Single MCTS of about 400 um in diameter were harvested after a 96-h initiation
incubation of 1.2x103 MIAPaCa-2 cells and 1.0x103 PANC-1
cells per culture well. With the medium being refreshed every 48 h, spheroid
volume increased according to the Gomertz equation, which classically and
mathematically describes tumor and also spheroid growth kinetics (19). Maximum spheroid diameter of about 1
mm was reached after about 9 days for MIAPaCa-2 and 10 days for PANC-1
spheroids. Double spheroid volume was obtained after 29 h for MIAPaCa-2 and 28 h
for PANC-1 spheroids (Figure 1A).
Figure 1
General characteristics of spheroid growth. A,
Volume of MIAPaCa-2 and PANC-1 spheroids as a function of time in
culture, with an initiation interval of 4 days and a seeding density of
1.2x103 MIAPaCa-2 cells and 1.0x103 PANC-1
cells per well. Data points are mean spheroid volumes for 8 to 16
spheroids. B, Proportion of propidium iodide
(PI)-positive cells in MIAPaCa-2 and PANC-1 spheroids as a function of
the average spheroid diameter determined by flow cytometry following
dissociation of 15 to 30 spheroids. C, Viable cells in
MIAPaCa-2 and PANC-1 spheroids as a function of the average spheroid
diameter. Data are reported as average cell numbers determined from 3
aliquots of 15 to 30 spheroids.
We compared the dead cells, calculated as the proportion of PI-stained cells in
spheroids, as determined by flow cytometric analysis following dissociation
(Figure 1B). The proportion of dead
cells in MIAPaCa-2 spheroids of 400 and 600 um in size was about 5 to 8.58% and
15.52 to 20.02%, respectively. On the other hand, the proportion of dead cells
in PANC-1 spheroids with sizes of 400 and 600 um was about 4.96 to 10% and 15.78
to 19.86%, respectively.
The number of viable cells per spheroid, was determined by automated counting
following spheroid dissociation. For MIAPaCa-2 and PANC-1, a positive linear
correlation between spheroid size and viable cells per spheroid was observed
(Figure 1C). Meanwhile, the proportion
of PI-positive cells (membrane-defective cells) monitored by flow cytometry
increased during spheroid growth, reflecting the initiation of more cell death
in the spheroid center at sizes >500 um. On the other hand, spheroids of
smaller size (e.g., 400 um) contained only 5 to 10% membrane-defective
cells.
Applicability and linearity of the APH assay in pancreatic cancer cell
spheroid cultures
The linearity of the APH assay signal in MIAPaCa-2 and PANC-1 spheroids as a
function of the viable cell count/spheroid is shown in Figure 2. The absorption signal was linear in MIAPaCa-2
spheroids, with cell number from 3.3x103 to 1.24x105
cells/spheroid, covering spheroid diameters of up to 1000 um. In PANC-1
spheroids, the APH signal was linear up to a maximum cell number of
1.19x105 cells/spheroid and a diameter of about 1000 um. These
results showed applicability and well-fitting linearity of the APH assay in both
MIAPaCa-2 and PANC-1 spheroid cultures.
Figure 2
Linearity of the acid phosphatase (APH) assay in MIAPaCa-2 and PANC-1
spheroids. APH colorimetric measurement in MIAPaCa-2 and PANC-1
spheroids (mean, n>=8 spheroids) as a function of the average number of
viable cells per spheroid. Three aliquots of 20 spheroids were measured
for each data point.
Cytotoxicity in MCTS using the APH assay
In order to investigate the applicability of the APH method for determining
drug-induced cytotoxicity in spheroids, MIAPaCa-2 and PANC-1 MCTS at day 4 with
a size of 360 to 410 um, that consisted of about 0.78 to 1.5x104 and
0.70 to 1.5x104 viable cells and <10% dead cells, were incubated
with gemcitabine. Spheroids were analyzed after a 72-h treatment interval with
0.01 to 200 uM gemcitabine for the following parameters: spheroid size and
volume, APH-assay signal, and cell count per spheroid. The effect of gemcitabine
relative to untreated controls was calculated, and the results of the APH assay
and cell count analysis were elevated (Figure
3). The results showed quite similar curves across the gemcitabine
concentration range that was applied here. The results further indicated that
the APH assay would be a reliable and valuable model to investigate drug
efficacy in spheroids.
Figure 3
Acid phosphatase (APH) activity reflects cell viability in MIAPaCa-2
and PANC-1 spheroids after treatment. Comparison of APH activity and
live cell counts following dissociation in MIAPaCa-2 and PANC-1
spheroids after treatment with different concentrations of gemcitabine
for 72 h. Drug efficacy was documented relative to the respective
untreated controls. Data are reported as means.
Drug efficacy in MCTS vs monolayer culture using the APH
assay
Drug efficacy in 3-D cultures was revealed to be different from that observed in
classical 2-D cell cultures. The APH assay is a novel tool used to investigate
and quantify differences of drug sensitivity in spheroid and monolayer cultures.
In this study, two drugs (gemcitabine and 5-FU) were compared in relation to
application of the APH assay in spheroids. The drug dilutions used did not alter
the background absorbance. Dose-response curves were documented in MIAPaCa-2 as
well as PANC-1 monolayer cultures and in spheroids ranging in size from 360 to
410 um at the initiation of treatment. Drug efficacy experiments were performed
on a 96-well plate using 0.01 to 200 uM gemcitabine and 5-FU.
Drug effects in MIAPaCa-2 and PANC-1 cells were elevated after 72-h treatment
intervals in three independent experiments per drug with n=8 spheroids per
condition in each experiment. After a 72-h drug treatment, the APH signal
decreased in a dose-dependent manner relative to untreated controls. Treatment
with 200 uM gemcitabine of MIAPaCa-2 cells resulted in >64% loss of cell
viability, whereas PANC-1 monolayer cells generally showed a 45% survival rate,
even at high gemcitabine concentrations. When treated with 200 uM 5-FU,
MIAPaCa-2 and PANC-1 monolayer cells showed a 38.6% and 51.24% survival rate,
respectively. The IC50 values in MIAPaCa-2 monolayer cultures were
47.6+-25.2 uM for gemcitabine and 61.9+-21.2 uM for 5-FU. PANC-1 monolayer
cultures showed IC50 values of 64.9+-10.3 uM for gemcitabine. At the
highest drug concentration of 200 uM, a reduction of cell viability >50% was
not observed; thus the IC50 in PANC-1 monolayer culture could not be
estimated for 5-FU (Figure 4).
Figure 4
Application of the acid phosphatase (APH) assay to determine drug
effects in MIAPaCa-2 and PANC-1 spheroid cultures. APH activity/cell
viability in MIAPaCa-2 and PANC-1 monolayer and spheroid cultures after
72 h of treatment with gemcitabine and 5-fluorouracil (5-FU). Data are
reported as means of >=3 individual experiments each with eight spheroids
treated and measured per condition. IC50 values were
calculated to investigate the difference of drug efficacy in 2-D
vs 3-D culture and in these two pancreatic cancer
cell lines.
MIAPaCa-2 and PANC-1 spheroid cultures demonstrated significantly reduced
sensitivities to two different chemotherapeutic agents. Even at the highest drug
concentration of 200 uM, a >=50% reduction of cell viability was not observed in
either MIAPaCa-2 or PANC-1 spheroids (Figure
4). Thus, the IC50 in MIAPaCa-2 and PANC-1 spheroid
cultures could not be estimated for gemcitabine and 5-FU. These results showed
that the efficacy of the drugs tested in this study was generally lower in
MIAPaCa-2 and PANC-1 spheroids than in monolayer culture.
Microscopic imaging was performed prior to the APH assay in order to test the
hypothesis that the spheroid volume after treatment was not necessarily
indicative of cell viability and the signal intensity of the APH assay. Phase
contrast images of MIAPaCa-2 spheroids treated with gemcitabine and 5-FU are
shown in Figure 5. Spheroid volume
reduction and disruption reflected a cell loss. Evident spheroid shedding and
disruption occurred in spheroids of MIAPaCa-2 cells treated with 100 uM
gemcitabine, but viable cells could still be detected by the APH assay.
Nevertheless, microscopic images might still be supplementary parameters of 3-D
cultures when they are used for drug-efficacy testing.
Figure 5
Spheroid integrity following treatment with gemcitabine and
5-fluorouracil (5-FU). Phase contrast images of MIAPaCa-2 spheroids at
the initiation of drug treatment and after a 72-h treatment interval
with 0.1, 10, and 100 uM (Bar: 500 um).

Discussion
The limitations of 2-D cell culture have motivated researchers to develop an
in vitro model for the study of cancer and drug efficacy.
Compared to animal models, in vitro models are conducive to
systematic, repetitive, and quantitative investigation of cell or tissue physiology
in drug discovery and development (20 (21). These models can be more easily controlled
and are usually less expensive and less time-consuming than animal models.
In vitro models can be used to assess a large number of
combinations of experimental parameters. Such high-throughput testing is usually not
feasible with animal-based models. Here, we have established a spheroid-based 3-D
culture model in MIAPaCa-2 and PANC-1 MCTS using the APH assay, and investigated the
potential of the model as a spheroid-based drug assay for pancreatic cancer in 3-D
cultures.
The MCTS model was first described in the 1970s by Sutherland et al. 5) as a way to mimic the heterogeneity present
in solid tumors and account for the effect of the tumor microenvironment on drug
transport and efficacy. This model attempted to bridge the gap between standard
monolayer cell culture and actual tumors. In fact, tumor cells grown as spheroids
acquire some type of clinically relevant multicellular resistance to
apoptosis-inducing drugs, which may mimic the chemoresistance found in solid tumors
(22-24). Thus, experts in the field have proposed including MCTS as a
mandatory model in major programs for drug screening and development. The underlying
benefits of using MCTS in antitumor drug testing have frequently been alluded to
(13,25,26). In our previous study
27), a 3-D culture method was found for
assessing chemosensitivity. However, the spheroids used in that method were not
homogeneous, and the complex method was not convenient for antitumor drug
testing.
In this study, spheroids grown from MIAPaCa-2 and PANC-1 pancreatic cancer cell lines
showed an exponential growth pattern in agarose-treated, 96-well plates. A maximum
spheroid diameter of approximately 1 mm was reached after about 9 days of culture
for MIAPaCa-2 and 10 days for PANC-1 spheroids. The physiological state of spheroids
depends on the spheroid size, the individual and cell-type-specific behavior of
pancreatic cancer cells, the cell density, and also the culture time. We intended to
establish a spheroid-based screen from these two pancreatic cancer cell lines with
clear pathophysiological gradients but without obvious cellular death at the
initiation of drug treatment. According to the literature and our experience, a
4-day initiation interval for spheroid formation was found to establish spheroids of
pancreatic cancer cells reproducibly under identical culture conditions (15,28).
The spheroids would reach a standard size of 365 to 410 um after 96 h of incubation
at the initiation of drug treatment. Small spheroids with a size of up to 200 um are
often used for drug testing and may be sufficient to reflect 3-D cell-cell and
cell-matrix interaction (29-31). It is clearly inappropriate, when
attempting to create pathophysiological conditions, to have a hypoxic area in the
spheroid center. Hypoxia is not only a well-established radio- and drug-resistance
factor, but also leads to numerous indirect effects in tumor cells by modulating
expression patterns (25,32). Larger spheroids with a diameter between 500 and 600 um
develop secondary central necroses, which make the pathophysiological conditions
complex and difficult to control. Thus, we chose spheroids with a size of 365-410 um
for drug treatment.
Easy and rapid handling of both spheroid culture and analysis are crucial
requirements of a model for drug testing of pancreatic cancer. Different techniques
for spheroid culturing have been extensively described in studies, including
advantages and disadvantages (25,26,33).
We selected the easy and rapid agarose-overlay, 96-well plate approach to set up the
spheroid-based model.
Several different cytotoxicity/viability assays for 2-D culture, based on absorption,
luminescence, or fluorescence, were considered and tested in MCTS. Parameters
included cellular uptake of membrane-impermeable dyes such as CCK-8, MTT, Alamar
blue, and EtHD-1, release of substrates such as lactate dehydrogenase or
glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase, activity of mitochondrial dehydrogenases or
intracellular esterases, and cellular adenosine triphosphate level and the ratio of
ATP/ADP. These commercially available systems have been successfully applied in
monolayer cultures in various tumor cell lines, including pancreatic cancer cells
(34-37). However, most of these tests could not be easily adapted to
application in 3-D culture.
Recently, the APH assay was established as a reliable tool to determine cell
viability in complex 3-D culture (18,33). The APH assay is simple, rapid, and
high-throughput compatible, as it does not require spheroid dissociation. Our study
also verified that the APH assay 1) is applicable for single MIAPaCa-2 and PANC-1
spheroids in 96-well plates, 2) does not require spheroid dissociation, and 3) is
linear and highly sensitive for MIAPaCa-2 and PANC-1 spheroids up to
1.24x105 and 1.19x105 cells/spheroid, respectively (both
up to a size of 1000 um).
To establish a pancreatic cancer-specific, spheroid-based model, we used the APH
assay by treating MIAPaCa-2 and PANC-1 spheroids with gemcitabine and 5-FU, two
drugs that are commonly used for pancreatic cancer. The efficacy of gemcitabine and
5-FU in monolayer and spheroid cultures was compared. We observed a reduced
sensitivity of spheroid cell cultures to gemcitabine and 5-FU compared to monolayer
cultures, which should be reflected not only by spheroid integrity and size but also
by APH signals and APH-dependent IC50 values. In the present study,
monolayer controls of MIAPaCa-2 and PANC-1 showed dose-response curves and
IC50 values consistent with the published literature, both for
gemcitabine and 5-FU (35,38,39).
Drug effects on MIAPaCa-2 spheroids were shown via the APH assay, but the incubation
interval necessary to reach the IC50 demonstrated that spheroids of the
MIAPaCa-2 pancreatic cancer cell line were less sensitive to gemcitabine and 5-FU
than monolayer culture. Reduced drug efficacy was also seen in PANC-1 in the
spheroids compared with monolayer culture. We conclude that our pancreatic cancer
spheroid model more closely reflected the efficacy of antitumor drugs. With the APH
assay, classic drugs for pancreatic cancer such as gemcitabine and 5-FU could be
easily monitored in spheroids and compared with monolayer data. One of the potential
applications of the spheroid-APH assay is the testing of single and combined
therapeutic strategies with new target-, and/or pathway-specific treatment
modalities.
In conclusion, we established a spheroid-based culture model in the MIAPaCa-2 and
PANC-1 pancreatic cancer cell lines for drug testing with the APH assay. The model
integrates reproducible, easy, and rapid handling for drug testing of pancreatic
cancer. The model would help to fill the gap between monolayer cultures and
in vivo models in the process of drug development and testing
for pancreatic cancer.
