[Abstract, Introduction, Results, Discussion, Methods, Mixed]

Tyrosine 23 Phosphorylation-Dependent Cell-Surface Localization of
                    Annexin A2 Is Required for Invasion and Metastases of Pancreatic
                    Cancer. The aggressiveness of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) is characterized by                     its high metastatic potential and lack of effective therapies, which is the                     result of a lack of understanding of the mechanisms involved in promoting PDA                     metastases. We identified Annexin A2 (ANXA2), a member of the Annexin family of                     calcium-dependent phospholipid binding proteins, as a new molecule that promotes                     PDA invasion and metastases. We found ANXA2 to be a PDA-associated antigen                     recognized by post-treatment sera of patients who demonstrated prolonged                     survival following treatment with a PDA-specific vaccine. Cell surface ANXA2                     increases with PDA development and progression. Knockdown of ANXA2 expression by                     RNA interference or blocking with anti-ANXA2 antibodies inhibits in                         vitro invasion of PDA cells. In addition, post-vaccination patient                     sera inhibits in vitro invasion of PDA cells, suggesting that                     therapeutic anti-ANXA2 antibodies are induced by the vaccine. Furthermore,                     cell-surface localization of ANXA2 is tyrosine 23 phosphorylation-dependent; and                     tyrosine 23 phosphorylation is required for PDA invasion. We demonstrated that                     tyrosine 23 phosphorylation resulting in surface expression of ANXA2 is required                     for TGFb-induced, Rho-mediated epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT),                     linking the cellular function of ANXA2 which was previously shown to be                     associated with small GTPase-regulated cytoskeletal rearrangements, to the EMT                     process in PDA. Finally, using mouse PDA models, we showed that shRNA knock-down                     of ANXA2, a mutation at tyrosine 23, or anti-ANXA2 antibodies,                     inhibit PDA metastases and prolong mouse survival. Thus, ANXA2 is part of a                     novel molecular pathway underlying PDA metastases and a new target for                     development of PDA therapeutics.

Introduction
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) remains a lethal cancer with an overall 5-year
                survival rate of <5% [1]. Inability to diagnose early, high metastatic potential,
                and drug resistance account for its low survival rate. Although it is
                well-established that the pathogenesis of PDAs follows stepwise stages that display
                increasing cellular atypia and accumulate clonal mutations or aberrant expression of
                oncogenes or tumor suppressor genes such as K-Ras,
                    p16, p53, and DPC4/SMAD4
[2], drugs that
                target these molecular abnormalities have not yet translated into improved clinical
                responses [3].
                The aggressive nature of PDA is featured by its high incidence of metastases at the
                time of initial diagnosis and high incidence of early metastases following surgical
                resection. However, little is known about the molecular mechanisms underlying its
                invasion and metastatic processes. A better understanding of these mechanisms is
                essential for the development of innovative and improved treatments for PDA.
Cancer immunotherapy treatment approaches are under development for PDA. We developed
                an allogeneic, granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) secreting
                PDA vaccine for patients with PDA[4], [5], [6]. Phase I and II trials evaluating this vaccine in patients
                with resected PDA demonstrated both clinical and immunologic responses[4], [5]. This
                immunotherapy approach provided immunized lymphocyte reagents for identifying novel
                PDA antigens that are currently being tested as targets for PDA therapy[7], [8]. The potential
                therapeutic targets identified so far have also provided important clues for the
                study of molecular mechanisms underlying PDA development and metastases. Here we
                report the utilization of a functional proteomic approach that identified Annexin A2
                (ANXA2) as a new candidate PDA target of the immune response. In addition, we show
                that tyrosine 23 phosphorylation-dependent cell-surface localization of Annexin A2
                is required for epithelial to mesenchymal transition, invasion, and metastases
                formation of PDAs.

Results
Identification of ANXA2 as a new candidate PDA tumor-associated antigen and
                    biomarker
We used immunized sera from two subjects who demonstrated both evidence of
                    post-vaccination cellular immune responses and prolonged disease-free survival
                    (DFS) and overall survival (OS) in a phase II study of a GM-CSF secreting whole
                    cell PDA vaccine [4] to screen whole cell extracts from the PDA vaccine
                    cell lines which served as the proteome. Protein extracts were separated by a
                    two-dimensional electrophoresis (2-DE); and immunoblot analysis was performed to
                    compare antigen recognition by pre- and post-vaccination sera. Proteins
                    recognized by post-vaccination sera relative to pre-vaccination sera were
                    identified by mass spectrometry. ANXA2 was a protein identified on the
                    post-vaccination sera immunoblots of both patients evaluated. To further
                    evaluate the prevalence of post vaccination humoral responses to ANXA2, purified
                    recombinant ANXA2 was used to screen pre-vaccination and post-vaccination sera
                    from 16 additional patients treated in this phase II study by both ELISA and
                    western blot (Figure S1). Vaccine induced
                    anti-ANXA2 antibodies, measured by a sandwich ELISA, were detected in 6 of 7
                    patients who demonstrated a DFS greater than 36 months [4], and only in 1 of the other 9
                    patients who did not demonstrate long-term DFS (Table 1). These data provide the
                    first evidence that ANXA2 is an antibody target of immune responses against
                    PDA.
ANXA2 is reported to be overexpressed in a variety of cancers including PDA when
                    compared with normal tissues[9]. However, ANXA2 is normally a cytoplasmic and lumenal
                    residing protein in pancreatic tissue, and previous studies[9] have not determined
                    whether cell surface ANXA2 expression is a dominant pattern in PDA tissues.
                    Therefore, we analyzed the location of ANXA2 expression by immunohistochemistry
                    (IHC) in the resected tumors from 52 of the 60 patients treated in our Phase II
                    study for whom specimens were available for staining. We found that normal
                    pancreatic ductal epithelial cells show weak cytoplasmic and lumenal staining by
                    IHC, whereas cell-surface localized ANXA2 increases with progression from PanIN
                    lesions to invasive PDA (Figure S2). Specifically, 39
                    (75%) of 52 fresh pancreatic tumor tissue samples tested have increased
                    cell surface expression of ANXA2 (Figure S2). These data provide
                    further support that ANXA2 surface expression is associated with PDA development
                    and as such may serve as an immunologic target.
Inhibition of ANXA2 suppresses the in vitro invasion of PDA
                    cells
We next investigated whether the cell surface localization of ANXA2 plays a
                    biologic role in facilitating PDA invasion. ANXA2 has been reported to bind
                    membrane-associated phospholipids and have diverse cellular functions including
                    plasminogen activation, fibrinolysis, membrane transport, cytoskeleton
                    rearrangement, angiogenesis, cell adhesion and migration. ANXA2 also functions
                    as a high-affinity receptor for multiple extracellular ligands that have been
                    implicated in cancer development, invasion, and metastases [10], [11], [12], [13]. To directly test whether
                    ANXA2 is involved in PDA invasion, ANXA2 expression was knocked down in PDA
                    cells by RNA interference (Figure 1A). Knock-down of ANXA2
                    suppressed the in vitro invasion of PDA cells in a Boyden
                    chamber assay (Figure
                            1B and Figure S3). The induction of
                    antibodies against ANXA2 that is observed in vaccinated patients with prolonged
                    DFS (Table 1)
                    suggests that anti-ANXA2 antibodies may have a direct anti-tumor effect. We
                    therefore tested both rabbit polyclonal and mouse monoclonal anti-ANXA2
                    antibodies and found that they can specifically inhibit in
                        vitro invasion of PDA cells (Figure 1C,D). Moreover, sera
                    from immunized patients who demonstrated a post-vaccination response to ANXA2
                    similarly inhibited in vitro invasion of PDA cells (Figure 1E). The
                    data presented so far link increasing cell surface expression of ANXA2 with PDA
                    invasion capability and suggests that vaccine-induced antibody responses may
                    inhibit this aspect of PDA progression. However, the mechanism by which ANXA2
                    mediated PDA invasion occurs has yet to be explored. Interestingly, the invasive
                    capacity of PDA cells is not correlated with their proliferative rate suggesting
                    an independent mechanism (Figure S3). To uncover other
                    regulatory mechanisms that account for the invasion capacity of PDA cells, we
                    further examined the sub-cellular localization of ANXA2 in various PDA cell
                    lines by fluorescent staining with anti-ANXA2 antibodies (Figure
                            S4). ANXA2 is predominantly localized to the cell membrane
                    in all 8 PDA cell lines found to have high invasion capacity, whereas ANXA2 is
                    present predominantly in the cytoplasm of cell lines with low invasion capacity
                            (Figure S4 and
Table
                            S1). This data further support a role for ANXA2
                    translocation from the cytosol to the cell surface/membrane in enhancing PDA
                    cell invasion.
10.1371/journal.pone.0019390.g001
Figure 1
RNA interference, anti-ANXA2 antibodies, and vaccine-induced sera
                            inhibit ANXA2-mediated PDA invasion in vitro.
A. Western blot analysis showing that ANXA2
                            siRNA inhibits expression of ANXA2 in a PDA cell line. Whole cell
                            extracts from Panc10.05 treated with control siRNA and
                                ANXA2 siRNA, respectively, were blotted by rabbit
                            polyclonal anti-ANXA2 antibody (upper panel) and by rabbit polyclonal
                            anti-GAPDH antibody (lower panel). B.
In vitro invasion assay showing that
                                ANXA2 siRNA inhibits the invasion capacity of the
                            10.05 PDA cell line. Invaded cells were measured by MTT assays and
                            normalized to total cell numbers. C. Polyclonal anti-ANXA2
                            antibodies inhibit the invasion capacity of Panc10.05 cells.
                                D. Mouse anti-ANXA2 monoclonal antibodies (mAb) inhibit
                            the invasion capacity of mouse Panc02 and human Panc10.5 cells. For
                                C and D, rabbit anti-ANXA2 antibody,
                            rabbit control Ig, mouse anti-ANXA2 mAb (clone: ZO14), or mouse isotype
                            control IgG1 was added into the culture media at a final concentration
                            of 25 ug/ml throughout the in vitro invasion
                            assays, respectively. E. Only post-vaccination sera from
                            patients (3.009 and 3.028) who demonstrated anti-ANXA2 antibody
                            responses, but not from patients (3.037 and 3.039) who did not
                            demonstrate anti-ANXA2 antibody responses, inhibit invasion of Panc10.05
                            cells. Pre- and post- vaccination sera were added to the culture media
                            at a ratio of 1:50. Triplicate experiments were done for
                                B-E.
Phosphorylation of ANXA2 at Tyr23 promotes the cell-surface localization of
                    ANXA2 and the invasion capacity of PDA cells
ANXA2 is a substrate for Src kinase, which phosphorylates ANXA2 at Tyr23 both
                        in vivo and in vitro[10], [11], [12], [13], and Tyr23 phosphorylation
                    has been suggested to be important for normal cell scattering and branching
                        morphogenesis[14], [15]. ANXA2 is also reported to be tyrosine-phosphorylated
                    when it localizes to the cell surface under stress [16]. Since malignant cells often
                    mimic normal cells that have been subjected to a variety of stress stimuli, we
                    postulate that ANXA2 is translocated to the cell surface as a
                    tyrosine-phophorylated protein during tumorigenesis as well. To test this, we
                    eluted the cell surface fraction of ANXA2 from Panc10.05 PDA cells, which have
                    cell surface localization of ANXA2 (Figure
                            S4 and
Table
                            S1), and found the cell surface fraction of the ANXA2
                    protein is in fact a tyrosine-phosphorylated protein (Figure 2A). In contrast, ANXA2
                    could not be eluted from the cell surface of Panc 3.11 cells, a PDA cell line
                    that demonstrated cytoplasmic localization of ANXA2 (Figure
                            S4). To test whether phosphorylation of ANXA2 at Tyr23 is
                    important for its localization to the PDA cell surface, we generated a panel of
                    plasmids expressing either wild-type ANXA2 (ANXA2WT), the ANXA2
                    mutant protein (ANXA2Y23A) in which Tyr23 was altered to an alanine
                    residue making a non-phosphorylatable mutant, or the ANXA2 mutant protein
                        (ANXA2Y23E) in which Tyr23 was altered to a glutamic acid residue
                    mimicking constitutive phosphorylation. When Panc10.05 cells were transfected
                    with these plasmids expressing ANXA2 tagged by GFP [17], ANXA2WT-GFP
                    and ANXA2Y23E-GFP localized predominantly to the cell surface of PDA
                    cells. In contrast, ANXA2Y23A-GFP localized to the cytoplasm (Figure 2B). These
                    results were further confirmed by using a lentivirus to constitutively express
                        ANXA2WT, ANXA2Y23A, or ANXA2Y23E in the PDA
                    cells (Figure S4). Taken together, these data demonstrate that
                    phosphorylation at Tyr23 results in the localization of ANXA2 at the cell
                    surface.
10.1371/journal.pone.0019390.g002
Figure 2
Tyr23 phosphorylation-dependent membrane/cell-surface localization of
                            ANXA2 is required for in vitro invasion of PDA
                            cells.
A. Panc10.05 and Panc3.11 cells were either incubated with
                            EGTA containing buffer or EGTA-free buffer. Two different elutions from
                            two different PDA cell lines, as indicated, were immunoprecipitated by
                            anti-ANXA2 antibodies (lanes 1-4) or anti-phosphotyrosine
                            (anti-pTyr) antibodies (lanes 9-12). After elution, the two PDA
                            cell lines were lysed and the lysates were immunoprecipated by anti-pTyr
                            antibodies (lanes 5-8). B. GFP-tagged ANXA2 in
                            Panc10.05 cells. Upper panels: GFP signals; lower panels: overlapped
                            images of GFP signals and DAPI staining of nuclei. C.
                            FLAG-tagged ANXA2 expression in Panc10.05 cells transfected with the
                            pcDNA-based plasmid vector alone (lanes 1,5,9,13), the plasmid carrying
                                ANXA2WT-FLAG (lanes 2,6,10,14), the plasmid carrying
                                ANXA2Y23A-FLAG (lanes 3,7,11,15), or the plasmid carrying
                                ANXA2Y23E-FLAG (lanes 4,8,12,16). Whole cell extracts
                            (WCE) (lanes 1-4), cell membrane fractions (lanes 5-8,
                            13-16), or cytoplasmic fractions (lanes 9-12) were isolated
                            by biochemical fractionation from the Panc10.05 PDA cells, respectively,
                            and immunoprecipitated using either anti-FLAG M2 antibodies (lanes
                            1-12) or anti-phosphotyrosine antibodies (anti-pTyr) (lanes
                            13-16). The immunoprecipitates were blotted using anti-FLAG M2
                            antibodies. D.
In vitro invasion of Panc10.05 cells. E.
In vitro invasion of Panc3.11 cells. For both
                                D and E, cells were transfected with the
                            empty pcDNA-based plasmid vector (lanes 1,2), the plasmid carrying
                                ANXA2WT-FLAG (lane 3), the plasmid carrying
                                ANXA2Y23A-FLAG (lane 4), or the plasmid carrying
                                ANXA2Y23E-FLAG (lane 5). Lane 1 was also cotransfected
                            with the scramble siRNA control. Lanes 2-5 were also cotransfected
                            with ANXA2 siRNA duplex. Results of duplicate
                            experiments are shown.
To determine whether the change in ANXA2 localization that occurs as a result of
                    Tyr23 phosphorylation affects the invasion capacity of PDA cells, a set of
                    plasmids that express exogenous FLAG-tagged ANXA2 including
                    ANXA2WT-FLAG, ANXA2Y23A-FLAG, and
                    ANXA2Y23E-FLAG were developed. These vectors are RNA interference
                    resistant because of silent mutations within the siRNA target site. Panc10.05
                    PDA cells transfected with these plasmids were fractionated into cytoplasmic and
                    cell membrane fractions (Figure S4). We first confirmed
                    that only ANXA2 WT-FLAG and ANXA2Y23E-FLAG, but not
                        ANXA2Y23A-FLAG, localize to the cell membrane fraction (Figure 2C). As
                    expected, ANXA2 WT-FLAG protein is tyrosine phosphorylated in the
                    cell membrane fraction. Next, we found that co-transfection of the pcDNA plasmid
                    expressing ANXA2WT-FLAG or ANXA2Y23E-FLAG, but not
                        ANXA2Y23A-FLAG, with the siRNA (to inhibit endogenous ANXA2),
                    reversed siRNA-mediated inhibition of invasion of Panc10.05 cells (Figure 2D).
                    However, in cells with low invasion capacity and only cytoplasmic localization
                    of ANXA2, such as Panc3.11 (Table S1), co-transfection with
                        ANXA2Y23E-FLAG bypasses the phosphorylation regulatory mechanism
                    by mimicking constitutive phosphorylation and promotes the invasion of Panc3.11
                    cells (Figure
                        2E). These data suggest that Tyr23 phosphorylated ANXA2
                    confers PDA invasion capacity.
ANXA2 contributes to the Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition of PDA
                    cells
Phosphorylated ANXA2 plays a role in cell scattering in normal morphogenesis
                        processes[14], [15]. Our data so far support a role for phosphorylated
                    ANXA2 in PDA invasion. The epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) regulates
                    the normal morphogenic process during embryonic development and tissue
                    restructuring, and the initial steps of invasion and metastases are suggested to
                    mimic EMT[18].
                    Therefore, we sought to determine whether ANXA2 is required for the EMT in PDA
                    cells. EMT is characterized by the suppression of the transcription of
                    epithelial markers such as E-cadherin and induction of mesenchymal markers such
                    as slug and vimentin. ANXA2 has been reported to mediate TGFb-activated EMT
                    during the process of cardiac valve development [19]. In addition, TGFb is
                    reported to induce EMT in cultured PDA cells [20], [21]. To examine whether ANXA2
                    has a direct role in the EMT process of invading PDA cells, a lentiviral vector
                    containing ANXA2 shRNA was used to achieve long-term
                    suppression of ANXA2 in PDA cells (Figure S3). Real-time PCR analysis
                    showed that E-cadherin was suppressed, whereas slug and vimentin were induced
                    during TGFb-induced EMT in Panc10.05 cells with control shRNA, but not in
                    those infected with ANXA2 shRNA (Figure 3A). In addition,
                    E-cadherin protein expression was suppressed in TGFb-treated cells with
                    control shRNA, but remained unchanged in TGFb-treated cells that also
                    expressed ANXA2 shRNA (Figure 3B,C). As predicted, PDA
                    cells without ANXA2 shRNA lose their cell-cell adhesion
                    phenotype and scatter around the culture slip following TGFb treatment,
                    reminiscent of an EMT pattern (Figure 3B). Although ANXA2 has not yet been shown
                    to be involved in SMAD4-mediated EMT, it has been shown to be involved in Rho
                    (small GTPases)-mediated cell detachment, a trait of EMT [15]. Therefore, we also
                    evaluated whether Rho mediates ANXA2-associated EMT in PDA and found that Rho
                    activation is not detected in PDA cells with shRNA inhibition of ANXA2 following
                    TGFb treatment (Figure
                            3C). These results demonstrate that loss of ANXA2
                    expression leads to loss of TGFb-Rho-mediated EMT in PDA cells.
10.1371/journal.pone.0019390.g003
Figure 3
ANXA2 expression and Tyr23 phosphorylation are required for the EMT
                            process in PDA cells.
A. Quantitative real-time PCR analysis of E-cadherin, slug,
                            and vimentin mRNA expression in Panc10.05 PDA cells with and without
                            knockdown of ANXA2 by shRNA. The relative ratios of mRNA expression with
                            TGFb1 treatment versus without TGFb1 treatment are shown. The
                            data were normalized with b-actin expression. B. The
                            same pair of PDA cells employed in panel a were treated
                            with TGFb1 for 0, 36, or 72 hours, respectively, and then harvested
                            for immunostaining with anti-E-cadherin antibodies and PE-conjugated
                            secondary antibodies. DAPI was used to stain the nuclei. C.
                            The same pair of PDA cells employed in panel A were treated
                            with TGFb1 for 0, 36, or 72 hours, respectively, and then harvested.
                            A fraction of cell extract was used for western blot analysis and was
                            stained with anti-E-caherin, anti-RhoA,B,C, or anti-b-actin
                            antibodies as the internal control, respectively. The remaining cell
                            extract underwent a pull down assay through an affinity column that
                            specifically binds activated, GTP-bound forms of Rho. This was followed
                            by western blot analysis with anti-Rho antibodies. Note that anti-Rho
                            antibodies recognize Rho A, B and C, whose molecular weights are
                            slightly different, resulting in two bands on the gel. Control
                            designates the cells with control shRNA; ANXA2 shRNA
                            designates the cells with ANXA2 shRNA. D.
                            Quantitative real-time PCR analysis of E-cadherin, slug, and vimentin
                            mRNA expression in a pair of Panc10.05 PDA cell lines infected with
                            lentivirus expressing wild-type ANXA2 (ANXA2-WT) or Y23A mutated ANXA2
                            (ANXA2-Y23A), respectively. The relative ratios of mRNA expression with
                            TGFb1 treatment (indicated with +) versus without TGFb1
                            treatment (indicated with -) are shown. The data were normalized with
                            b-actin expression.
We next examined whether Tyr23 phosphorylation is important for ANXA2-mediated
                    EMT in PDA cells. We observed that the endogenous ANXA2 no longer localizes to
                    the cell surface in the cells expressing the tyrosine site loss variant
                        ANXA2Y23A (Figure S4). In addition,
                    transfection with ANXA2Y23A-FLAG inhibits the invasion of Panc10.05
                    cells (Figure S4), suggesting that ANXA2Y23A has a
                    dominant negative effect. Consistent with published data [22], we found that
                        ANXA2Y23A can still bind to its partner S100A10/p11 [23] in the
                    cytosol, but not in the cell membrane (Figure
                            S5). Therefore, overexpressed, cytoplasmic-localized
                        ANXA2Y23A may sequester all of the S100A10/p11 in the cytosol,
                    thereby conferring a dominant negative effect. Therefore, taking advantage of
                    the dominant negative effect of ANXA2Y23A, and employing this
                        ANXA2Y23A mutant, we further demonstrated that EMT is induced by
                    TGFb in cells expressing ANXA2WT, but not in cells expressing
                        ANXA2Y23A (Figure 3D). Thus, these data further demonstrate
                    that the Tyr23 phosphorylation of ANXA2 promotes the EMT of PDA cells and is one
                    conceivable mechanism by which ANXA2 localizes to the PDA cell membrane and
                    confers the potential for PDA cells to invade.
Expression and tyrosine phosphorylation of ANXA2 are required for PDA
                    metastases formation in vivo
Local invasion by tumor cells is a known step in the process of metastasis. Our
                    data demonstrate that ANXA2 facilitates invasion of PDA cells in
                        vitro. We therefore employed a transplantable murine pancreatic
                    cancer model of metastases (Figure S6) to evaluate the role of
                    ANXA2 expression, phosphorylation, and cell surface localization in the PDA
                    metastasis process in vivo. In this model, 100% of the
                    mice die with liver metastases at approximately 4-6 weeks (Figure 4A) after splenic
                    injection of 2x106 Panc02 murine PDA cells. Panc02 cells
                    infected with a GFP expressing lentivirus carrying shRNA specific for
                        ANXA2 knockdown or control shRNA were sorted for
                    GFP-positive cells by FACS. After confirming the knockdown of ANXA2 expression
                            (Figure S3), 2x106 cells were injected
                    into the splenic bed prior to performing a hemisplenectomy, and mice were
                    monitored for survival. Mice injected with Panc02 cells expressing the
                        ANXA2 shRNA survived significantly longer than mice
                    injected with Panc02 cells expressing control shRNA (p<0.0001) (Figure 4B).
                    Necropsy was performed on all mice that died, as well as those that still
                    survived to day 90 following tumor implantation. Macroscopic inspection showed
                    that 17/17 mice in the control group, but no mice (0/17) in the
                        ANXA2 shRNA group developed liver macro-metastases (Figure 4C).
                    Additional pathologic analyses indicated that mice in the ANXA2
                    shRNA group died due to tumor formed at the splenic bed (local regional tumor
                    growth) (Figure S7). To confirm that PDA cells carrying
                        ANXA2 shRNA are not able to seed the liver,
                        1x106 Panc02 cells labeled with Qtracker 565 were injected
                    at the splenic bed. Five days later, frozen sections of liver were examined
                    under fluorescent microscope for Qtracker 565-labeled cells (Figure 4D).
                    Significantly fewer Qtracker 565-positive cells are seen in the livers of
                        ANXA2 shRNA mice when compared with the control shRNA group
                    (p<0.0001) (Figure
                            4E).
10.1371/journal.pone.0019390.g004
Figure 4
shRNA-knockdown of ANXA2 or a mutation at Tyr23 inhibits PDA
                            metastases and prolongs mouse survival.
A. Livers from representative mice receiving intrasplenic
                            injections of mouse PDA cells infected with a lentivirus carrying either
                            control shRNA or ANXA2 shRNA. B.
                            Kaplan-Meier curves comparing the survival of mice receiving Panc02
                            cells carrying either control shRNA or ANXA2 shRNA. A
                            log-rank analysis on Day 90 showed that inhibition of ANXA2 expression
                            with shRNA significantly prolonged survival (p<0.0001).
                                C. Summary of the number of mice developing metastases
                            in both control and ANXA2 shRNA groups under
                            macroscopic inspection. None of the mice in the ANXA2
                            shRNA group formed liver macro-metastases. D. Shown are
                            representative frozen sections of mouse liver imaged under fluorescent
                            microscope assessing Qtracker565-positive cells and DAPI-stained nuclei.
                            Panc02 cells labeled with Qtracker565 (Invitrogen) were injected into
                            the mouse splenic bed followed by hemisplenectomy. Three mice in each
                            group were injected with either Panc02 carrying the control shRNA or
                            Panc02 carrying the ANXA2 shRNA. Five days later, mice
                            were euthanized and 10 frozen sections that cross each liver were
                            stained with DAPI for nuclei and then examined under fluorescent
                            microscope. In each frozen section, five 20x fields were randomly chosen
                            to score the numbers of Qtracker565-positive cells. E. The
                            sum of five fields of each section was considered to be one individual
                            data set and a comparison was made between the control shRNA and the
                                ANXA2 shRNA expressing PDA tumor cells. The result
                            shows that significantly fewer Qtracker565-positive cells were
                            found in the livers from the ANXA2 shRNA group as
                            compared with the control shRNA group (p<0.0001). F.
                            Kaplan-Meier curves comparing the survival of mice receiving Panc02
                            cells expressing either ANXA2-WT or ANXA2-Y23A. A log-rank analysis
                            showed that expression of the Tyr23 phosphorylation-deficient mutant of
                            ANXA2 significantly prolonged survival (p = 0.001).
                                G. Summary of the number of mice developing metastases
                            in both ANXA2-WT and ANXA2-Y23A groups. None of the mice in the
                            ANXA2-Y23A group formed liver macro-metastases.
The ANXA2 protein sequence including Tyr23 is conserved in mammals and its
                    phosphorylation can be induced in non-human mammalian cells [14], [15], [24]. Thus, the
                    hemisplenectomy model was again employed to examine whether Tyr23
                    phosphorylation of ANXA2 is required for ANXA2-mediated murine PDA metastases.
                    Mice injected with Panc02 cells stably expressing exogenous ANXA2Y23A
                    survived significantly longer than mice injected with Panc02 cells stably
                    expressing exogenous ANXA2WT (p = 0.001) (Figure 4F). All
                    12 mice in the control group whereas 0/12 mice in the ANXA2Y23A group
                    developed liver macro-metastases (Figure 4G).
We also used a previously established orthotopic model in which PDAs metastasize
                    to the peritoneum [25] to confirm that ANXA2 can initiate metastasis from a
                    primary tumor in addition to facilitating the seeding of PDA metastases in the
                    liver. This study confirmed that ANXA2 knockdown does not
                    affect the growth of primary PDAs significantly (Figure
                            S8). All mice in the control group developed large
                    peritoneal macro-metastases. In contrast, most mice in the
                        ANXA2 shRNA group did not develop macro-metastases. In
                    addition, the mean size of metastatic lesions that formed in
                        ANXA2 shRNA mice, typically manifesting as micro-metastatic
                    foci, was significantly smaller (P = 0.0012) than the
                    control mice (Figure S8). IHC analysis of cell
                    surface ANXA2 demonstrated that these micro-metastatic foci were formed by cells
                    that still expressed ANXA2 due to incomplete knockdown by ANXA2
                    shRNA (Figure S8). Taken together, our data provide strong
                    evidence that Tyr23 phophorylated and cell surface expressed ANXA2 facilitates
                    the metastatic process, and supports ANXA2 as a novel target for PDA therapy
                    development.
Anti-ANXA2 antibodies suppress PDA metastases in vivo and
                    prolong survival in a mouse model of PDA
Next, we evaluated whether an inhibitory ANXA2-targeted monoclonal antibody can
                    suppress Panc02 hepatic metastases using the above described liver metastases
                    forming mouse model. Specifically, Panc02 injected mice were treated twice
                    weekly with a mouse monoclonal anti-ANXA2 antibody (shown to inhibit Panc02
                    invasion in vitro in Figure 1) until death. All mice
                    (10/10) in the control IgG group whereas only 1/9 mice in the ANXA2 antibody
                    group developed liver macro-metastases (Figure 5A). Furthermore, mice
                    treated with the anti-ANXA2 antibody survived significantly longer than mice
                    treated with isotype control IgG (p = 0.02). Similar to the
                    mice receiving ANXA2 shRNA, mice in the ANXA2 antibody group
                    died due to tumor progression at the splenic bed, suggesting this anti-ANXA2
                    antibody therapy does not inhibit the growth of primary PDAs. Predictably, mice
                    implanted with Qtracker 565-labeled Panc02 cells and treated with a single
                    intraperitoneal injection of anti-ANXA2 antibody were found to have
                    significantly (p<0.0001) fewer Qtracker 565-positive cells in their livers as
                    compared with mice given the control mAb (Figure 5B,C). These data further
                    support ANXA2 as a target for therapeutic intervention of metastases.
10.1371/journal.pone.0019390.g005
Figure 5
Anti-ANXA2 antibodies inhibit PDA metastases and prolong mouse
                            survival.
A. Summary of the number of mice developing metastases in
                            both isotype control IgG1 and anti-ANXA2 Ab groups. Only one of the mice
                            in the anti-ANXA2 Ab group formed liver macro-metastases. Mice in the
                            anti-ANXA2 Ab group survived significantly longer than mice in the
                            control IgG group (p = 0.02). B. Shown
                            are representative frozen sections of mouse liver (4 mice/group studied)
                            imaged under a fluorescent microscope for Qtracker565-positive cells and
                            for DAPI-stained nuclei as described in Figure 4D-E.
                                C. The sum of five 20X fields of each section was
                            considered as one individual data set and was analyzed in the
                            statistical comparison between the isotype control IgG1 and the
                            anti-ANXA2 antibody group. The result shows that significantly fewer
                            Qtracker565-positive cells were found in the livers of mice
                            treated with the anti-ANXA2 antibody as compared with the control IgG1
                            antibody (p<0.0001).

Discussion
ANXA2 was brought to our attention as a target of vaccine induced immune responses
                identified on a proteomic screen of PDA proteins using immunized sera from patients
                who demonstrated prolonged DFS. A previously published study links ANXA2
                overexpression in pancreatic cancer tissue with rapid recurrence after gemcitabine
                adjuvant chemotherapy in postoperative patients [26]. In this study, we demonstrate
                three new findings that elucidate the role of ANXA2 in PDA invasion and metastases.
                First, localization of ANXA2 expression on the cell surface is required for PDA
                invasion in vitro and metastases formation in
                vivo. Second, Tyr23-phosphorylation is required for localization of ANXA2
                on the PDA cell surface and subsequent PDA invasion and metastases formation.
                Importantly, knockdown of ANXA2 or inhibition with ANXA2 antibody therapy inhibits
                the metastatic process. Third, loss of ANXA2 expression or phosphorylation at Tyr23
                leads to loss of TGFb-Rho-mediated EMT in PDA cells. Taken together, these
                findings identify a new role for phosphorylated ANXA2 in mediating PDA cell invasion
                via Rho-regulated EMT and facilitating PDA metastases.
Our study shows for the first time that cell surface localization of ANXA2, mediated
                by Tyr23 phosphorylation, enhances PDA cell invasion in vitro and
                PDA metastases to liver in vivo. Relevant to our findings, a recent
                report showed that knockdown of ANXA2 in a PDA cell line inhibits cell migration
                    in vitro
[27]. We also
                evaluated a panel of PDA tumor cell lines and 52 fresh tissue specimens and showed
                the frequent expression of cell surface ANXA2 in primary PDAs, which further
                supports a role for ANXA2 in PDA progression. Another report demonstrated that the
                reduction in cell surface ANXA2 expression in response to changes in interferon
                gamma levels leads to reduced prostate cancer cell invasion[28], suggesting that the cell
                surface translocation of ANXA2 may be an important cellular process for multiple
                types of cancers[10].
We also show that ANXA2 phosphorylation is required for TGFb-induced and
                Rho-mediated EMT phenotypes of PDA cells. A previous study showed that loss of Smad4
                expression in PDA can lead to the aberrant activation of STAT3, which may contribute
                to the switch in function of TGFb from a tumor-suppressive to a tumor-promoting
                EMT pathway in PDA [20]. Currently, knowledge of the EMT process in cancer
                development is largely limited to its characteristic transcription circuit. It is
                still unknown how cancer cells functionally undergo cytoskeletal rearrangement to
                exhibit mesenchymal features, interact with extracellular matrix, and migrate to
                distant locations when the EMT process is initiated. One of the cellular functions
                of ANXA2 is its involvement in cytoskeletal rearrangement, which is thought to be
                mediated by its tyrosine phosphorylation and its interaction with small GTPases
                    [14], [15]. Thus, our
                data, linking ANXA2 and EMT in PDA, provide a new pathway that may regulate the EMT
                process that occurs in cancer invasion and metastases.
However, it is still not clear which tyrosine kinases phosphorylate ANXA2 in PDA. A
                number of tyrosine kinases including Src, insulin receptor, and insulin-like growth
                factor (IGF)-1 receptor have previously been implicated in regulating the cellular
                function and cell surface translocation of ANXA2 in normal morphogenesis
                    processes[14], [15], [24]. Further investigation of these tyrosine kinases as
                mediators of ANXA2 phosphorylation in PDA is therefore warranted to further
                delineate the mechanism by which ANXA2 becomes phosphorylated in PDA. In addition,
                inhibitors of Src and IGF-1 receptor are under clinical development for the
                treatment of various cancers including PDA [29]. Therefore, ANXA2
                phosphorylation or its cell surface translocation may also serve as a biomarker for
                assessing treatment response to these agents. Importantly, blocking ANXA2 by
                anti-ANXA2 antibodies can inhibit PDA invasion and metastases, suggesting that ANXA2
                and its associated pathways are viable therapeutic targets.
We have used two mouse models of PDA that have provided complementary data supporting
                a role for ANXA2 in PDA progression and metastases formation in
                    vivo. Data employing the PDA orthotopic model suggests that ANXA2
                confers PDA cells with the invasion and metastasis potential when the PDA cells
                originate from the primary tumor. Data from the liver metastasis model suggests that
                ANXA2 also facilitates PDA cell metastasis formation once the PDA cells gain access
                to the blood supply supporting a metastastic site. Thus, ANXA2 appears to be
                important for the initial invasion process and for the survival of PDA cells at
                their metastatic destination. Accumulated evidence has supported the
                "seed-and-soil" hypothesis that the metastatic "seeds" of a
                given cancer only take root and grow in certain organs with a welcoming
                microenvironment or "soil" [30]. Our data support this hypothesis
                and suggest that ANXA2 facilitates PDA cell invasion and motility locally, but also
                provides an important signaling pathway linking the PDA cell to the growth signals
                in the new metastatic environment (the "soil").
In summary, this study provides in vivo evidence supporting ANXA2 as
                a mediator of PDA invasion and metastases. Additional studies are needed to further
                elucidate the mechanisms by which ANXA2 interacts with PDA stroma at both the
                primary and metastatic tumor sites to accomplish these processes. Importantly, this
                study demonstrated that blocking ANXA2 by anti-ANXA2 antibodies can inhibit PDA
                metastases, providing the rationale for developing therapeutic agents that target
                ANXA2.

Materials and Methods
Cell lines and tissue culture
The human pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) cell lines were previously
                    described [31],
                        [32]. The
                    human fibroblast cell line was established from human PDA paracancerous tissues.
                    All human PDA cell lines were maintained in RPMI1640 media supplemented with
                    10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) in a humidified incubator at 37degC and
                    5% CO2. The mouse Panc02 cells were maintained in DMEM media
                    supplemented with 10% FBS in a humidified incubator at 37degC and
                    10% CO2. When indicated, TGFb1 (R&D Systems) was added
                    in the culture medium at a final concentration of 400 pM. Cells were treated
                    with TGFb1 for 48 hours before harvest unless otherwise noted. The Panc02
                    cell line is an established chemical carcinogen induced mouse PDA cell line that
                    originated from the C57Bl/6 mice [33].
Antibodies
The rabbit polyclonal anti-ANXA2 antibody (H50), mouse monoclonal anti-ANXA2
                    antibody (clone: ZO14), mouse monoclonal anti-p11 antibody, and the mouse
                    monoclonal anti-E-cadherin antibody were obtained from Santa Cruz Biotechnology,
                    Invitrogen, BD Transduction, and Zymed Laboratories, respectively.
Human serum
Human sera and pancreatic tumor tissue samples were obtained from patients
                    enrolled in a phase II study of an allogeneic GM-CSF secreting whole cell PDA
                    vaccine. Written informed consent was obtained in compliance with the Johns
                    Hopkins Medical Institution Institutional Review Board (IRB)-approved J9988
                    protocol with approval number #00-01-13-02 [4]. Serum was collected and
                    stored according to standard procedures.
Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA)
A previously published ELISA assay was used to detect anti-ANXA2 antibody
                    responses in patients [34]. The calibration curve was generated with the
                    post-vaccination sera from patient 3.009.
DNA cloning and plasmid constructions
The full-length human ANXA2 cDNA was obtained by reverse
                    transcription of total RNA purified from Panc10.05 cells, followed by
                    high-fidelity PCR amplification with ANXA2 primers. The
                    non-complementary region of the reverse primer also contained the FLAG tag
                    sequence. The resultant PCR product of ANXA2 cDNA was then
                    cloned into the pCR vector (Invitrogen) and was sequenced to confirm no
                    introduction of missense or nonsense mutations. The ANXA2 cDNA
                    fragment with a C-terminal FLAG tag was further subcloned into the lentiviral
                    vector (LV). In this lentivirus, ANXA2 is expressed under the
                    control of the EF-1a promoter. For the co-transfection of both plasmids and
                    siRNA, the resultant PCR product of ANXA2 cDNA with a
                    C-terminal FLAG tag was cloned into the pcDNA3.3 vector (Invitrogen) directly.
                    Y23A and Y23E mutations were created by site-directed mutagenesis according to
                    the manufacturer's manual (Stratagene).
Plasmid transfection, lentiviral infection, and RNA interference
For plasmid transfection and RNA interference, cells were seeded in multiple
                    6-well plates to 80% confluence. For each well, 2 ug of pcDNA-based
                    plasmid and/or 40 pmol siRNA duplex, were transfected with lipofectamine 2000 in
                    serum-containing medium according to the manufacturer's manual
                    (Invitrogen). For protein expression analysis, cells were harvested at 48 hours.
                    The ANXA2 siRNA was synthesized by Ambion, Inc.; the scramble
                    siRNA was purchased from Ambion.
To produce lentivirus expressing ANXA2, the plasmid with
                    lentiviral constructs was co-transfected with packaging plasmids into 293T cells
                    as previously described [35]. Lentivirus supernatant was collected at 48 hours.
                    For infection, cells were seeded in multiple 6-well plates to 80%
                    confluence. For each well, 2 ml lentivirus supernatant was added and incubated
                    for 48 hours before cells were harvested.
The lentivirus expressing human ANXA2 hairpin shRNA was obtained
                    from Open Biosystems. Lentivirus was produced according to the
                    manufacturer's manual. For infection of Panc10.05 cells, 6 ml of viral
                    supernatant was added to adherent cells plated in each 75 cm flask and incubated
                    for 48 hours. Cells from two flasks were sorted by GFP in a FACS cell sorter at
                    72-96 hours after infection. The cells infected with lentivirus expressing
                    GFP alone were sorted. Total RNA was immediately extracted after cell sorting.
                    The lentivirus expressing mouse ANXA2 hairpin shRNA was
                    obtained from GeneCopoeia.
Cell invasion assays
Cell invasion assays were carried out using 96-well Transwell plates with
                    8-um pores and reagents in the Cultrex BME Cell Invasion Assay system
                    according to the manufacturer's manual with modification (R&D Systems).
                    For all invasion experiments, 0.5xBME (Basement Membrane Extract) was used to
                    coat the top well and 10% serum containing media was added to the bottom
                    well. To score the cells across the transwell, MTT
                    (3-(4,5-Dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide) assays were used
                    as previously described [36]. Relative MTT units representing invasion capacity
                    were measured and normalized by total cell numbers. To assess the spontaneous
                    leakage of cells through the BME-coated transwell, invasion specific controls
                    were also performed by adding serum-free media in the bottom wells. To exclude
                    the effect of such leakage, relative MTT units in the invasion experiments were
                    adjusted by subtracting the MTT values of leaked cells in matched invasion
                    specific controls.
PDA cells were plated at 1x104 cells per well in triplicate. PDA
                    cells were transfected with either ANXA2-targeted siRNA or
                    control siRNA prior to plating. Invasion was measured at 48 hours following
                    plating using an MTT readout system.
Fluorescent immunostaining
Panc10.05 cells were grown on cover slips to 90% confluence and were fixed
                    in 4% paraformaldehyde for 15 min. Cover slips were then treated with PBS
                    containing 0.1% Triton X-100 for 5 minutes followed by washing with PBS.
                    After, cover slips were blocked with 10% normal goat sera in PBS for 1
                    hour and were then incubated with rabbit anti-ANXA2 antibodies or mouse
                    anti-E-cadherin mAb at a 1:100 dilution in 10% normal goat sera
                    overnight at 4degC. Following a PBS wash, they were further incubated with
                    FITC-conjugated goat anti-rabbit IgG or PE-conjugated goat anti-mouse IgG (Santa
                    Cruz Biotechnology) at a 1:200 dilution in 10% normal goat sera at
                    room temperature for 1 hour. They were subsequently washed with PBS containing
                    0.5% NP-40. Cover slips were mounted in a medium containing DAPI
                    (4',6-diamidino-2-phenylindole) (Vector Labs) and examined by a
                    fluorescent microscope.
Immunohistochemistry (IHC)
IHC staining for both human and mouse ANXA2 was performed using a standard
                    protocol on an automated stainer from Leica Microsystems. After
                    deparaffinization and hydration of tissue, heat induced antigen retrieval was
                    performed with EDTA buffer (pH 9.0) for 20 minutes. Incubation with the H50
                    rabbit anti-AnxA2 antibody (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) at a 1:100 dilution
                    was followed by secondary antibody incubation from the bond polymer refine
                    detection kit (Leica Microsystems). The reaction was developed using substrate
                    3,3'-Diamino-benzidine hydrochloride (DAB). All slides were counterstained
                    with hematoxylin. Each area of PDA cells on the entire slide was scored from 0
                    to 3+ by two clinical pathologists (P.I. and R.A.) independently. Scores of
                    0 to 3+ measure the different intensities of cell-surface staining of
                    AnxA2, with a score of 0 representing no staining and a score of 3+
                    representing the strongest staining. The percentage of PDA cells at each score
                    level was estimated. The average score of cell-surface AnxA2 expression was
                    calculated as follows:(a%, b%, c%, and d% are the
                    percentages of PDA cells with score 0 to 3, respectively.)
Whole cell extract and cell fractionation
PDA whole cell extracts were obtained as previously described [37]. In brief,
                    cell pellets were resuspended in Lysis 250 buffer followed by a freeze and thaw
                    process that was performed 3 times. The cell lysate was spun at 15,000 rpm for
                    10 minutes and supernatant was removed. The protocols to separate membrane and
                    cytoplasmic fractions were adapted from those previously published [38]. EGTA
                    (Ethylene
                    glycol-bis(2-aminoethylether)-N,N,N',N'-tetraacetic
                    acid) elution of cell surface AnxA2 followed a previously established procedure
                        [16].
Immunoprecipitation and immunoblot analysis
Anti-phosphotyrosine antibody conjugated sepharose (P-Tyr-100, Cell Signaling
                    Technology) was used to immunoprecipate tyrosine-phosphorylated proteins.
                    Anti-AnxA2 antibodies were first conjugated to sepharose beads according to the
                    manufacturer's manual (Pierce) prior to being used for immunoprecipitation.
                    Anti-FLAG M2 antibodies-conjugated beads were obtained from Sigma. For anti-p11
                    immunoprecipitation, cell fractionations were first incubated with anti-p11
                    antibodies and then with protein A sepharose beads. All immunoprecipitations
                    were done at 4degC overnight, followed by washing with Lysis 250 buffer [37].
After whole cell extracts, cell fractions, or immunoprecipitants were boiled in
                    SDS-sampling buffer, they were loaded on 10% gradient SDS-PAGE (BioRad).
                    The gel was then transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane and blotted with the
                    rabbit anti-AnxA2 polyclonal antibody at a 1:1000 dilution followed by
                    HRP-conjugated goat anti-rabbit IgG (Amershan Pharmacia) at a 1:3000
                    dilution.
Recombinant His6-tagged ANXA2 was expressed in TOP10 E. coli and
                    purified on a High-Trap Ni column according to the manufacturer's manual
                    (Amershan Pharmacia). One microgram of purified His6-tagged ANXA2 was loaded on
                    each well of a 10% gradient SDS-PAGE. After transferring to a
                    nitrocellulose membrane, each individual lane was blotted with either
                    pre-vaccination serum or post-vaccination serum at a 1:1000 dilution.
                    Mouse anti-human IgG antibody (Sigma) was used at a 1:5000 dilution as the
                    secondary antibody.
Total cellular Rho, or activated Rho which was isolated by incubating the cell
                    extract with an activated Rho affinity binding column (GST-tagged Rho-binding
                    domain of Rhotekin), were detected by western blot with mouse anti-Rho A,B,C
                    mAbs provided by the Rho Activation Assay Kit according to the
                    manufacturer's manual (Upstate).
Reverse transcription and real-time PCR
RNA was isolated from cells using the RNAEasy kit (Qiagen), and reverse
                    transcribed using the first strand cDNA synthesis kit (Invitrogen). Quantitative
                    real-time reverse transcription-PCR (qRT-PCR) was performed with gene-specific
                    fluorescent TaqMan probes (Applied Biosystems) using an ABI PRISM 7500 Sequence
                    Detection System Instrument and the associated software (Applied Biosystems)
                    following the manufacturer's instructions. Each reaction was performed in
                    triplicate at 2 cDNA dilutions. The standard human b-actin gene
                        (BACT; Applied Biosystems) was used to normalize variations
                    in the quantities of input cDNA.
GFP-sorted, shRNA-lentiviral infected cells were subjected to real-time RT-PCR
                    analysis to measure the mRNA expression of E-cadherin, slug, and vimentin. As a
                    negative control, the lentivirus expressing only GFP was also used to infect a
                    control population of Panc10.05 cells. These cells were also sorted for
                    GFP-positive cells for this analysis. One pair of Panc10.05 cell lines, with and
                    without ANXA2 shRNA, were treated with TGFb1 for 48 hours
                    before they were harvested for mRNA expression analysis.
Mouse models of PDA
All animal experiments conformed to the guidelines of the Animal Care and Use
                    Committee of the Johns Hopkins University and animals were maintained in
                    accordance to guidelines of the American Association of Laboratory Animal Care
                    (Approval# MO08M142).
The mouse liver metastasis model was established using a previously described
                    hemispleen injection technique [39], [40]. The transplantable tumor model allows for the
                    assessment of in vivo tumor growth following shRNA knockdown of
                    targeted PDA expressed proteins. The spleens of anesthetized female C57Bl/6 mice
                    ages 8 to 10 weeks were divided into two halves and the halves were clipped.
                    Mouse PDA cells (2x106) were injected into the splenic bed
                    (splenic artery and veins) through one hemispleen followed by a flush with the
                    HBSS buffer. After 30 seconds, the splenic vessels draining the injected
                    hemispleen was clipped and the hemispleen was removed. The abdominal wall was
                    sutured, and the skin adapted using wound clips. All mice were followed three
                    times a week for survival. At necropsy, mice were examined macroscopically; and
                    multiple sections of livers and splenic bed injection sites were examined
                    microscopically with H&E staining and, as indicated, anti-ANXA2 IHC.
For survival analysis, mice were treated intraperitoneally with 10 ug
                    anti-ANXA2 monoclonal antibody ZO14 antibodies (Invitrogen) or isotype control
                    IgG1 in 100 ul PBS twice a week starting the day following the
                    hemisplenectomy procedure and continued until death. For the analysis of
                    Qtracker-labeled cells, mice in each group were treated intraperitoneally either
                    with 100 ug anti-ANXA2 monoclonal antibody ZO14 or with 100 ug
                    isotype control IgG1 on the day following the hemisplenectomy procedure and
                    sacrificed 5 days later.
Statistics
Statistical analysis was performed using software GraphPad Prism 5. Two tailed
                    Mann-Whitney test was used to compare differences between treatment groups.
                    Mouse survival was analyzed by the Kaplan-meier curve and the Log-Rank test.
                    Mouse experimental data from independent experiments were shown in a combined
                    analysis because of the consistency of the results.

Supporting Information
Table S1
Cell Surface Localization of Annexin A2 in Cells with Different
                            Invasive Capacities.
(PDF)
Click here for additional data file.
Figure S1
PDA patients demonstrate vaccine induced ANXA2-specific serologic
                            responses.
A. Purified recombinant His6-tagged ANXA2 (His6-ANXA2) on a
                        SDS-PAGE gel stained with coommassie blue. B. Purified His6
                        tagged ANXA2 on a SDS-PAGE gel was western-blotted by pre- and
                        post-vaccination sera. Patients marked by * had antibody induction,
                        which was manifested by stronger signals of ANXA2 on western blot with
                        post-vaccination versus pre-vaccination sera. C. Pre- and
                        post-vaccination sera from patients were tested for the presence of
                        anti-ANXA2 antibodies by ELISA using purified recombinant ANXA2-coated
                        plates. Positive antibody induction, which was manifested by a more than
                        2-fold increase in antibody reaction, was marked by *.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
Figure S2
Cell surface expression of ANXA2 is increased in the majority of human
                            PDAs. The pattern of ANXA2 expression was analyzed by IHC in 52
                        of 60 resected tumors from patients treated in a Phase II study for whom
                        specimens were available for staining. Representative IHC staining of ANXA2
                        in these human PDAs is shown (panels A, B,
                            C). Cell-surface expression of ANXA2 was semiquantitated
                        using a score of 0 to 3, with a score of 0 representing no staining and a
                        score of 3 representing the strongest staining. Normal pancreatic duct,
                        PanINs and PDA are indicated. Cytoplasmic and luminal staining was excluded
                        from scoring. Shown is the intensity of ANXA2 expression on the cell
                        surface. PDA cells vary in their ANXA2 expression level within the same
                        tumor tissue (panel C). To account for expression variability
                        within each specimen, the percentage of PDA cells at each score level was
                        estimated and the average score of each PDA tissue was calculated by
                        multiplying each score by their percentages (see Supporting Information
                        Materials and Methods). As expected, none of the normal appearing ductal
                        epithelial cells within the resected tumor masses express 3+ ANXA2 and
                        few express 2+ ANXA2 (panel B). An average score of 1.5 or
                        above was considered representative of increased cell surface expression of
                        ANXA2 in the tumor tissue.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
Figure S3
ANXA2 shRNA inhibits the invasion
                            capacity of multiple human and mouse PDA cell lines and PDA cell
                            invasion potentials vary among different PDA cell lines and do not
                            correlate with their proliferative rates.
A. Human Panc2.03 PDA cells or mouse Panc02 PDA cells were
                        infected with lentivirus carrying the shRNA specific for human or mouse
                            ANXA2 or lentivirus carrying the control shRNA. Invaded
                        cells were measured by MTT assays and normalized by total cell numbers.
                        Triplicate experiments were done for control shRNA and
                            ANXA2 shRNA, respectively. B. Panc10.05
                        (lanes 1,3) or Panc02 cells (lanes 2,4) infected with lentivirus either
                        carrying shRNA specific for human or mouse ANXA2 knockdown (lanes 3 and 4,
                        respectively) or carrying control shRNA (lanes 1,2) were sorted for
                        GFP-positive cells by FACS with one aliquot of cells saved for analysis of
                        ANXA2 expression prior to each experiment. A representative western blot
                        using the rabbit anti-ANXA2 antibody and the rabbit anti-GAPDH antibody
                        (control) is shown. C. A panel of PDA cell lines derived from
                        primary resected tumors were evaluated in an in vitro
                        invasion assay. Of 11 PDA cell lines tested, 8 have higher and 3 have lower
                        invasion capacity (Table S1). Shown are average
                        MTT units on three parallel experiments normalized to total cell numbers.
                            D. Expression of ANXA2 in each PDA cell line demonstrated
                        by immunoblot analyses with anti-ANXA2 polyclonal antibody. Lanes 1-11
                        correspond to human PDA cell lines: Panc01.28, Panc10.05, Panc2.8, Panc2.03,
                        Panc4.03, PancTS0129, Panc3.11, Panc2.13, Panc6.03, Panc9.3.96, and
                        Panc2.43, respectively; lane 12, human pancreatic para-cancerous fibroblast
                        cells. Expression of ANXA2 is slightly lower in cells with lower invasion
                        capacity and slightly higher in those with higher invasion capacity,
                        suggesting that over expression of ANXA2 in PDAs may contribute to, but does
                        not entirely explain the range of invasion potential of these PDA cell
                        lines. E. Growth curves of selected PDA cell lines measured by
                        MTT assays. Note that Panc3.11 cells with low invasive capacity grow
                        similarly to Panc10.05 or Panc2.8 with high invasive capacity.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
Figure S4
PDA cell invasion potential correlates with ANXA2 surface localization
                            on PDA cells and PDA cells expressing the exogenous ANXA2-Y23A mutant
                            have reduced surface localization and invasion potential
                                in vitro.
A. Fluorescent immunostaining shows predominant cell surface
                        localization of ANXA2 in representative cells with higher invasion capacity
                        (Panc2.43, Panc2.03), but not in cells with lower invasion capacity (human
                        fibroblast, Panc3.11, Panc9.3.96). See supplemental
                            Figure 6 for Panc10.05 cells. FITC indicates the images of
                        immunostaining with rabbit anti-ANXA2 polyclonal antibody and
                        FITC-conjugated secondary antibody. FITC+DAPI indicates the overlapped
                        images of FITC staining of ANXA2 and DAPI staining of nuclei. Fractions of
                        images are enlarged for better visualization. B. Fluorescent
                        immunostaining of ANXA2 in Panc10.05 cells either uninfected or infected
                        with lentivirus expressing wild-type ANXA2, lentivirus expressing Y23A
                        mutated ANXA2 or lentivirus expressing Y23E mutated ANXA2. FITC images or
                        overlapped images of FITC and DAPI staining are shown as indicated. Note
                        that immunostaining of ANXA2 detected both exogenous and endogenous ANXA2.
                        In cells infected with the tyrosine site loss variant
                            LV-ANXA2Y23A, even endogenous ANXA2 no longer localized to
                        the cell surface, suggesting that ANXA2Y23A has a dominant
                        negative effect (Figure S5). C.
                        FLAG-tagged ANXA2 expression in Panc10.05 cells transfected with the
                        pcDNA-based plasmid carrying ANXA2WT-FLAG, the plasmid carrying
                            ANXA2Y23A-FLAG, or the plasmid carrying
                        ANXA2Y23E-FLAG. Membrane fractions (M) and cytoplasmic fractions
                        (C) were isolated by biochemical fractionation and blotted with mouse
                        anti-GST antibodies as a quality control. The result shows that the membrane
                        fractions are not contaminated by cytoplasmic protein. D.
In vitro invasion of Panc10.05 cells transfected with the
                        pcDNA-based plasmid carrying ANXA2WT-FLAG (lane 1) or the plasmid
                        carrying ANXA2Y23A-FLAG (lane 2). Results of duplicate
                        experiments are shown.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
Figure S5
The ANXA2-Y23A mutant demonstrates a dominant negative effect.
A. Panc10.05 cells infected with the lentivirus expressing
                        wild-type ANXA2 (lanes 1,2) or the lentivirus expressing Y23A mutated ANXA2
                        (lanes 3-5) were fractionated into membrane (M, lanes 1,2,4,5) and
                        cytoplasmic fractions (C, lane 3). The fractions were immunoprecipated by
                        either rabbit anti-ANXA2 antibodies or mouse anti-p11 antibodies as
                        indicated and immunoblotted with anti-ANXA2 antibodies and anti-p11
                        antibodies, respectively. Note that ANXA2 and p11 can be co-immunoprecipated
                        from the membrane fraction of the cells exogenously expressing ANXA2-WT and
                        from the cytoplasmic fraction of the cells exogenously expressing
                        ANXA2-Y23A, suggesting that ANXA2-Y23A does not affect the complex of ANXA2
                        and p11 in the cytosol. However, neither ANXA2 nor p11 can be detected in
                        the membrane fraction of cells exogenously expressing ANXA2-Y23A although
                        these cells should still have endogenous expression of the wild-type ANXA2.
                        Therefore, this result suggests that exogenous ANXA2-Y23A may have
                        sequestered p11 in the cytosol. B. Whole cell extracts from
                        Panc10.05 cells either uninfected (lane 1), infected with lentivirus
                        expressing wild-type ANXA2 (lane 2), lentivirus expressing Y23A mutated
                        ANXA2 (lane 3), or lentivirus expressing Y23E mutated ANXA2 (lane 4), were
                        analyzed by western blot with rabbit anti-ANXA2 antibodies and mouse
                        anti-p11 antibodies. This result shows that the total ANXA2 expression is
                        increased in the cells exogenously expressing ANXA2 as compared with that in
                        the parental cells, whereas the expression level of p11 remains to be the
                        same. This result further suggests that cytoplasmic-localized ANXA2-Y23A has
                        the potential to sequester all the p11 proteins in the cytosol because it is
                        overexpressed and more abundant than the endogenous wild-type ANXA2.
                        Therefore, the reason for the observed dominant negative effect of
                        overexpressed ANXA2-Y23A is likely due to little p11 being available to bind
                        endogenous wild-type ANXA2 which depends on p11 for its translocation [16]. The
                        same experiments were done with mouse Panc02 cells and similar results were
                        obtained.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
Figure S6
Liver metastases model of mouse PDAs. Schema showing the
                        hemisplenectomy model for establishing PDA liver metastases. Mouse PDA cells
                        injected into the hemi-spleen of syngeneic mice form tumors at the splenic
                        bed and metastases in the liver.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
Figure S7
Histological analysis of tumors formed in the liver metastases
                            model. Shown are representative results of IHC analysis
                        evaluating ANXA2 expression using polyclonal anti-ANXA2 antibodies to stain
                        tumors formed at the splenic bed (left panels) and in the liver (right
                        panels). Upper panels received control shRNA and lower panels received
                            ANXA2 shRNA. All panels, 10x amplification. Mice were
                        examined macroscopically; and multiple sections of livers and splenic bed
                        injection sites were examined microscopically with H&E staining. All
                        mice in both groups had tumors at the splenic bed injection site. These
                        tumors were likely formed by PDA cells left behind during the splenic
                        injection. Sizes of these tumors were difficult to measure as they adhered
                        and/or infiltrated the remaining spleen. However, tumors that formed at the
                        splenic bed in mice of the ANXA2 shRNA group appeared to be
                        larger and more prominent than those of the control group. It is possible
                        that the prolonged survival in these mice allowed continued locoregional
                        growth when compared with the tumors in the control mice. IHC analyses were
                        performed on the liver metastases and the locoreginal tumors that formed at
                        the splenic bed to evaluate ANXA2 expression and localization. As shown in
                        this figure, PDA cells in tumors excised from the control mice that formed
                        at the splenic bed (panel a) and that metastasized to the liver
                        (panel b) stained positive for cell surface ANXA2. In contrast,
                        the majority of PDA cells expressing ANXA2 shRNA in tumors
                        that formed at the splenic bed failed to stain for ANXA2 (panel
                            c), consistent with the effect of shRNA. It is not
                        surprising to see a few ANXA2 positive PDA cells (representatives indicated
                        by arrows) because RNA interference is not able to knock down gene
                        expression completely. Panel d, arrow indicates a
                        micro-metastasis that expresses ANXA2. Of note, 5 of the 17 mice in the
                            ANXA2 shRNA group were found to have microscopic
                        metastases in their liver on H&E staining. These micro-metastatic tumors
                        stained positively for cell surface ANXA2, supporting ANXA2 mediated
                        metastasis formation likely due to the incomplete knockdown of ANXA2 with
                        shRNA.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
Figure S8
Histological analysis of metastases formed in the orthotopic PDA
                            model. The orthotopic PDA model was perfomed as previously
                        described [25]. Briefly, 1x106 mouse PDA cells
                        were injected s.c. into syngeneic female C57Bl/6 mice. After 2 to 4 weeks,
                        the s.c. tumors were harvested and cut into cubes of ~1 mm3.
                        New syngeneic female C57Bl/6mice, ages 8 to 10 weeks, were anesthetized. The
                        abdomen was opened via a subcostal left incision of 1 cm. A small pocket was
                        prepared inside the pancreas using microscissors, into which one piece of
                        the s.c. tumor was implanted. The incision in the pancreas was closed with a
                        suture. The abdominal wall was sutured, and the skin adapted using wound
                        clips. For the first experiment, 5 mice were implanted with Panc02 tumors
                        infected with control lentivirus and 8 mice with ANXA2
                        shRNA. On day 25 following implantation, some mice in the control group were
                        found dead. Therefore, remaining mice in both groups were euthanized for
                        necropsy. For the second experiment, an additional 6 mice were implanted
                        with tumors infected with control lentivirus and 7 mice with
                            ANXA2 shRNA. On day 21 following implantation, all the
                        mice in both groups were euthanized while they were all still alive. 11/11
                        mice in the control group developed severe peritoneal dissemination of large
                        implants. Although 10/15 mice in the ANXA2 shRNA group
                        developed peritoneal metastases, they were less extensive, smaller
                        peritoneal metastases. A. Shown are representative H&E
                        staining sections of peritoneal metastases, indicated by arrows. Left
                        panels: control shRNA group; right panels: ANXA2 shRNA
                        group. Left and right lower panels: enlarged areas of peritoneal metastases.
                            B. At the time of necropsy, PDAs at the primary
                        implantation site were measured and did not differ significantly between the
                        two groups (p = 0.248). C. The comparison
                        of the sizes of peritoneal metastases between the two groups in the second
                        experiment is shown. The sizes of peritoneal implants differs significantly
                        between the two groups (p = 0.0012). The largest
                        metastasis from each mouse was chosen for paraffin-embedding and for
                        measurement. Because mice in the ANXA2 group developed very small peritoneal
                        metastases, all measurements were done on the microscope-scanned, H&E
                        stained, tissue slides. D. Representative results of
                        immunohistochemistry analysis with polyclonal anti-ANXA2 antibodies of
                        tumors formed in the pancreas and peritoneal metastases are shown. Subpanels
                        (a),(c),(d), 10x amplification; subpanel (b), 4x amplification. In subpanel
                        (d), arrow indicates a small peritoneal metastasis. Note that the small
                        peritoneal tumors from the ANXA2 shRNA group stained
                        positive for cell surface ANXA2, suggesting that they were formed by cells
                        that still expressed ANXA2 due to incomplete knockdown by
                            ANXA2 shRNA.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
