[Abstract, Introduction, Results, Discussion, Methods, Mixed]

Sulforaphane counteracts aggressiveness of pancreatic cancer driven by dysregulated
Cx43-mediated gap junctional intercellular communication. The extreme aggressiveness of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) has been associated with blocked gap junctional intercellular communication (GJIC) and the presence of cancer stem cells (CSCs). We examined whether disturbed GJIC is responsible for a CSC phenotype in established and primary cancer cells and patient tissue of PDA using interdisciplinary methods based in physiology, cell and molecular biology, histology and epigenetics. Flux of fluorescent dyes and gemcitabine through gap junctions (GJs) was intact in less aggressive cells but not in highly malignant cells with morphological dysfunctional GJs. Among several connexins, only Cx43 was expressed on the cell surface of less aggressive and GJIC-competent cells, whereas Cx43 surface expression was absent in highly malignant, E-cadherin-negative and GJIC-incompetent cells. The levels of total Cx43 protein and Cx43 phosphorylated at Ser368 and Ser279/282 were high in normal tissue but low to absent in malignant tissue. si-RNA-mediated inhibition of Cx43 expression in GJIC-competent cells prevented GJIC and induced colony formation and the expression of stem cell-related factors. The bioactive substance sulforaphane enhanced Cx43 and E-cadherin levels, inhibited the CSC markers c-Met and CD133, improved the functional morphology of GJs and enhanced GJIC. Sulforaphane altered the phosphorylation of several kinases and their substrates and inhibition of GSK3, JNK and PKC prevented sulforaphane-induced CX43 expression. The sulforaphane-mediated expression of Cx43 was not correlated with enhanced Cx43 RNA expression, acetylated histone binding and Cx43 promoter de-methylation, suggesting that posttranslational phosphorylation is the dominant regulatory mechanism. Together, the absence of Cx43 prevents GJIC and enhances aggressiveness, whereas sulforaphane counteracts this process, and our findings highlight dietary co-treatment as a viable treatment option for PDA.

INTRODUCTION
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) is one of the most aggressive malignancies and is
typically diagnosed in an advanced state [1]. Gemcitabine is
the standard therapy for advanced pancreatic cancer [2] but
neither gemcitabine nor the newer FOLFIRINOX combination therapy do not directly target cancer stem
cell (CSC) pathways responsible for growth, metastasis, high resistance toward current cancer
therapeutics and relapse [3-5].
The mustard oil sulforaphane, which is present in high concentrations in broccoli and its sprouts
[6], has well-documented cancer preventive efficacy and was
recently shown to inhibit histone deacetylases (HDACs) [7].
Our recent results demonstrated that sulforaphane sensitizes pancreatic CSCs to chemotherapy by
inhibiting their self-renewal potential, apoptosis resistance and NF-kB activity [8-11]. Based on several
promising animal and epidemiological studies, prospective clinical trials with sulforaphane-enriched
broccoli sprout extracts are ongoing in the U.S. to examine the effect on atypical nevi, bladder and
prostate cancer [12], and a pilot study recently began at our
clinic to evaluate the effect of this nutritional strategy on patients with advanced PDA.
The inhibition of gap junctional intercellular communication (GJIC) may be involved in the
autonomous behavior of CSCs, because GJIC confers features absent in stem cells, namely contact
inhibition [13], apoptosis sensitivity [14] and terminal differentiation [15]. Gap
junctions (GJs) are channels in the plasma membrane that allow direct communication between cells by
the passive transport of small molecules and ions [16].
Gemcitabine and other chemotherapeutics also diffuse from cell-to-cell via GJs [17], and this so-called "bystander effect" leads to a
higher cellular concentration of cytotoxic agents [18]. GJs
are formed by a family of more than 20 different connexins, and altered connexin expression is
involved in carcinogenesis and therapy resistance [19]. The
absence of GJs is a common feature of pluripotent stem cells. However, cells derived from stem
cells, e.g., progenitor cells, have functional GJs, suggesting that GJIC develops during
differentiation [20-22]. Recently, in human spheroidal glioma cultures, reduced GJIC and very low levels of Cx43
were identified as mediators of self-renewal, invasiveness, and tumorigenicity by influencing
E-cadherin expression, a marker of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) [23]. The phosphorylation of Cx43, the most ubiquitously expressed connexin, has
been implicated in the regulation of GJIC at several stages, e.g., the export of the protein to the
plasma membrane, the formation and activity of GJs and connexin degradation [24]. For example, the inactivation of ERK1/2 and p38 MAP kinases by sulforaphane
has been suggested to inhibit H2O2-induced phosphorylation of Cx43 and a block
of GJIC in rat normal liver cells [25]. In addition,
epigenetic mechanisms may be involved in the regulation of Cx43 protein levels, because previous
findings demonstrated that the HDAC inhibitor 4-phenylbutyrate increased the expression of Cx43 in
pancreatic cancer cells and promoted the growth inhibition of xenograft tumors [26]. Similarly, the hypermethylation of the Cx43 promoter was
correlated with low Cx43 expression in human gliomas and lung cancer [23, 27].
In the present study, we demonstrate that the degree of CSC features and gemcitabine resistance
directly correlates with dysfunctional GJIC due to low or absent Cx43 protein levels. Our results
provide new mechanistic insight into stem cell signaling and suggest a dietary strategy consisting
of sulforaphane-containing cruciferous vegetables for the restoration of defective GJIC in
pancreatic cancer, which could promote re-sensitization to current chemotherapeutics.

RESULTS
The loss of GJIC correlates with a CSC-like phenotype and gemcitabine resistance
To evaluate the relationship between GJIC and therapy resistance, 3 established human PDA cell
lines with different levels of therapy sensitivity were treated with 50, 100 or 3,000 nM gemcitabine
and cell viability was examined using the MTT assay 72 h after treatment. At the lowest dose, cell
viability was reduced from 100% to 34, 82 and 95% in sensitive BxPc-3, the derived
gemcitabine-resistant subclone BxPc-3-GEM and resistant AsPC-1 cells, respectively, with a
comparable response at higher gemcitabine concentrations (Fig. 1A). This result was confirmed by
measuring apoptosis with annexin staining and FACS analysis (Fig. 1A). The gemcitabine resistance of
the PDA cell lines correlated with the amount of CSC features, such as p53 and K-ras status,
morphology, self-renewal potential, tumorigenicity, and the expression of E-cadherin and vimentin
(Table S1). In the following experiments, these cells were used as in vitro models
for PDA with low (BxPc-3), median (BxPc-3-GEM) and high (AsPC-1) CSC characteristics. We
microinjected the membrane-impermeable but GJ-permeable fluorescent dye Lucifer Yellow [30] and documented diffusion of fluorescence to neighboring cells
by fluorescence microscopy and video recording. For data analysis gray values of fluorescence
intensity were evaluated by image processing and the gray value of the directly injected cell was
set to 100% (Fig. 1B, C). The gray values of direct neighboring cells in the first row surrounding
the injected cell were 50, 20 and 0% in BxPc3, BxPc-3-GEM and AsPC-1 cells, respectively. The
staining of indirect neighbors located in the second row was detectable in BxPc-3 cells only. This
result is reflected by the evaluation of the means of gray values of all neighboring cells in each
cell line, which was highest in BxPc-3 cells (Fig. 1D). The blockade of GJs with 18aGA was
used as negative control and completely prevented the diffusion of Lucifer Yellow in all cell lines
as expected (Fig. 1C, D). These observations were strengthened by co-incubation studies with
fluorescence-labeled cells followed by examination of the fluorescence intensity in unlabeled target
cells and by co-incubation of gemcitabine-treated and -untreated cells and studying the gemcitabine
bystander effect (Fig. S1).
Figure 1
Loss of GJIC correlates with a CSC-phenotype.
(A) BxPc-3, BxPc-3-GEM and AsPC-1 human PDA cells were treated with gemcitabine (GEM) at the
indicated concentrations. Seventy-two hours later, viability was measured with the MTT assay and
apoptosis by annexin staining followed by FACS analysis. Specific apoptosis was calculated using the
formula 100x [(experimental apoptosis %) - spontaneous apoptosis of CO (%)] / [100 -
spontaneous apoptosis of CO %]. (B) After microinjection of Lucifer Yellow the diffusion of dye from
the injected cell to neighboring cells was detected by fluorescence microscopy and video recording
in the presence or absence of the gap junction blocker 18aGA (10 mM), which was incubated for
30 min prior to the injection of Lucifer Yellow. Representative images from fluorescence and light
microscopy are shown. Representative cells injected with Lucifer Yellow are marked by dotted lines,
and the scale bar indicates 20 mm. (C) Gray values of the injected cell (0, red line), the
first raw of neighboring cells (1, light green-dotted line) and the second raw of neighboring cells
(2, middle green-dotted line) were determined from the video pictures at the time points 0, 20, 40,
60, 80 and 100 s after injection of lucifer yellow and are shown in the diagrams. (D) The means of
gray values of all neighboring cells per cell line were calculated and are shown in the diagram
+- SD. **p < 0.01; *p< 0.05.
To evaluate whether the reduced expression of a specific connexin is responsible for impaired
GJIC, we studied the expression patterns of the standard connexins Cx32, 26, 36, 45 and 43 by
Western blot analysis. While Cx26, 32 and 36 levels were enhanced in BxPc-3-GEM and AsPC-1 cells
compared to BxPc-3 and non-malignant, immortalized pancreatic ductal CRL-4023 cells, Cx43 and 45
levels were diminished in the more malignant cells, with the strongest effects observed for Cx43
compared to BxPc-3 and CRL-4023 cells (Fig. 2A). Because the expression of connexins on the cell
surface is essential for GJ functionality, we evaluated the cell surface expression by double
immunofluorescence stainings for the cell surface marker EpCAM combined with either Cx26, 32, 36, 43
or 45. In line with the Western blot results, fluorescence microscopy revealed strong expression of
Cx43 on the cell surface of BxPc-3 cells; however, this expression was diminished in BxPc-3-GEM and
totally absent in AsPC-1 cells (Fig. 2B). The staining patterns of all other connexins were diffuse
in all cell lines without obvious cell surface expression (Fig. S2), which argues against a major
role in conferring functional GJs. In addition, electron microscopy revealed the presence of
functional GJs in BxPc-3 cells, as closely apposed membranes separated by a faint gap were visible
(Fig. 2C). In contrast, gap-like structures between neighboring AsPC-1 cells were characterized by
constant spacing and gaps filled with contrasting material. These gaps were too wide for regular GJ
arrays; therefore, our data suggest that non-functional GJs are present in AsPC-1 cells, which is
most likely due to the absence of Cx43 on the cell surface.
Figure 2
Loss of Cx43 expression in cells with CSC features.
(A) Proteins were harvested from PDA cells and immortalized pancreatic ductal cells (CRL-4023),
and the expression of Cx26, Cx32, Cx36, Cx43 (anti-Cx43 Ab was from Invitrogen) and Cx45 was
analyzed by Western blot. The expression of b-Actin (b-Act) served as a loading
control. (B) The expression and cellular localization of Cx43 (Cell Signaling) was analyzed by
double immunofluorescence staining using antibodies specific for Cx43. Co-staining with the cell
surface protein EpCAM was performed to mark the cell surface. Cx43-positive cells were visualized
with Alexa Fluor 488 (green), and EpCAM-positive cells were visualized with Alexa Fluor 594 (red).
The arrows mark Cx43 expression on the cell surface. Cells were analyzed under 400x
magnification using a Leica DMRB fluorescence microscope. Images of representative fields were
captured using a Kappa CF 20/4 DX digital color camera (Kappa GmbH, Gleichen, Germany) and Kappa
ImageBase 2.2 software. All photographs were taken at the same magnification, and the scale bar
indicates 20 mm. (C) Electron microscopy of gap junction-like cell-cell contacts of BxPc-3
and AsPC-1 cells. The arrows indicate the extension of junctions with a narrow gap in BxPc-3 cells,
and the inserts show details of the gaps at higher magnification. The scale bar indicates 1
mm.
In surgically resected human pancreas tissue we found high levels of Cx43 phosphorylated at Ser
368 and at Ser 279/282 in non-malignant pancreas tissue derived from 6 organ donors but not in
malignant PDA tissue derived from 6 patients (Fig. 3A, B). These data were confirmed in additional
PDA tissues derived from 3 patients, in which total Cx43 was completely absent in the malignant
parts of the sections but present in the non-malignant parts of each individual tissue (Fig. 4A).
This correlated to expression of E-cadherin, which was expressed in normal pancreas tissue, but not
in malignant pancreas tissue, as examined by double immunofluorescence staining of total Cx43 and
E-Cadherin followed by fluorescence microscopy (Fig. 4B).
Figure 3
Cx43 is downregulated in malignant pancreas tissue but not in normal pancreas tissue
(A) The expression of Cx43 phosphorylated at Ser 368 (Ab from Abcam) was analyzed by
immunohistochemistry in frozen 6-mm-thick tissue sections of non-malignant human pancreatic
tissue derived from 6 organ donors. Labeled anti-rabbit polymer-HRP was used as the secondary
antibody. (B) Likewise, the expression of Cx43 phosphorylated at Ser 279/282 was analyzed in the
same tissues and by the same technique.
Figure 4
Cx43 and E-Cadherin are downregulated in malignant but not in non-malignant parts of pancreas
tissue from the same patients
(A) The expression of total Cx43 (Invitrogen) was analyzed in the malignant and non-malignant
parts of frozen 6-mm-thick tissue sections of pancreas tissue derived from 3 patients. (B)
The expression of total Cx43 (Invitrogen) and E-cadherin (E-CAD) was analyzed by double
immunofluorescence staining of malignant and non-malignant parts of a patient-derived PDA tissue
section. Cx43-positive cells were visualized with Alexa Fluor 488 (green), and E-cadherin-positive
cells were visualized with Alexa Fluor 594 (red). DAPI staining indicates the cell nuclei. Tissue
sections were analyzed under 400x magnification. The scale bars indicate 50 mm.
The inhibition of Cx43 prevents GJIC and promotes tumor aggressiveness
To further elucidate the function of Cx43 for GJIC and CSC features in pancreatic cancer, we
knocked down Cx43 in low-malignant BxPc-3 cells by Cx43-directed siRNAs. Compared to the
non-specific control siRNA, 2 of 5 tested specific siRNAs completely downregulated Cx43 protein
expression at a concentration of 50 pmol, and the strongest effects were observed 3 days after
transfection, as evaluated by Western blot analysis (Fig. 5A, Fig. S3). For subsequent experiments,
siRNA-transfected BxPc-3 cells were microinjected with Lucifer Yellow, followed by video analysis of
dye diffusion and analysis of gray values. Compared to cells transfected with control siRNA, the
specific siRNA targeting Cx43 decreased the average staining of the neighboring cells in the first
cell row from 50 to 30% and in the second row from 20 to 15% (Fig. 5B). In parallel, the viability
of Cx43 siRNA-transfected BxPc-3 cells increased and the gemcitabine bystander effect was completely
abolished, as measured by the co-incubation of gemcitabine-treated and non-treated cells (Fig. 5C).
Furthermore, the downregulation of Cx43 enhanced the colony-forming capacity (Fig. 5D) and led to
the induction of stem cell-associated factors including Oct-3/4, Nanog, SOX2 and TP65 as well as the
EMT-related transcription factor Snail, as measured using an antibody protein array (Fig. 5E).
Figure 5
Silencing of Cx43 blocks GJIC and induces therapy resistance and clonogenicity
(A) BxPc-3 cells were treated with non-specific siRNAs (siCO) or specific siRNAs directed against
Cx43 (siCx43) for 3 days. The protein expression of Cx43 was analyzed by Western blot on days 1, 2
and 3 after incubation with siRNA or 3 d after incubation with siRNA at concentrations of 50, 100 or
200 pmol, as described in Fig. 3A. (B) BxPc-3 cells were treated with 50 pmol siRNA for 72 h
followed by microinjection of Lucifer Yellow, and the monitoring of dye diffusion was performed as
described in Fig. 1C. Pictures were extracted from the videos at distinct time points, and the gray
values were calculated. The average gray value of the first neighbors (1) and second neighbors (2)
and the gray value of the injected cell (0) are shown as the percentage over a period of 100 s. The
data shown represent the means of 3 independent experiments. (C) The cells were treated with 50 pmol
siRNA against Cx43 (siCx43) or non-specific control siRNA (siCO) for 72 h. Then, the cells were left
untreated or were treated with gemcitabine for 24 h, followed by co-culture at a ratio of 1:1 for 24
h. The viability of untreated cells (CO, white bars) and of cells co-cultured with
gemcitabine-treated cells (GEM-Byst, black bars) was measured using the MTT assay. (D) Three days
after transfection with siCO or siCx43, 1x103 BxPc-3-GEM cells/well were seeded
onto 6-well plates. The cells were grown without a change of the medium for 2 weeks, followed by the
evaluation of fixed and Coomassie-stained colonies containing at least 50 cells. The percentage of
plating efficiency was calculated with the formula 100x number of colonies/number of seeded
cells. The data shown represent the means +- SD (**p<0.01). (E) Proteins were isolated
3 d after transfection of BxPc-3 cells with siCO or siCx43, and the binding of proteins to
antibodies spotted in duplicate to the membrane of a Human Pluripotent Stem Cell Array was detected
using biotinylated secondary antibodies, streptavidin-HRP and chemiluminescence. The pixel density
was quantified using ImageJ software and normalized to the mean pixel intensity of reference spots
located at the coordinates A1, A4 and F1 on the membrane. Spot E4 is the negative control, where PBS
instead of the antibody was spotted onto the membrane. The mean values from duplicate experiments
with a similar outcome are shown.
Sulforaphane enhances Cx43 protein levels and GJIC and changes Cx43 phosphorylation
patterns
In an attempt to enhance Cx43 expression to restore GJIC and to inhibit CSC features, we
performed treatments with sulforaphane, and examined the expression of Cx43 by Western blot
analysis. Compared to untreated control cells, sulforaphane strongly increased the amount of total
Cx43 in all cell lines examined (Fig. 6A). Basal Cx43 phosphorylated at Ser 368 was highest in
BxPc-3 cells. Sulforaphane led to a time-dependent increase of the low basal levels of Cx43
phosphorylated at Ser 368 already 2 h after treatment in BxPc-3-GEM and AsPC-1 cells, whereas the
high basal expression in BxPc-3 cells was not further increased, but rater decreased. Moreover, the
expression of Cx43 phosphorylated at Ser 279/282 was increased by sulforaphane treatment in all 3
cell lines. Sulforaphane also induced the expression of E-cadherin in all 3 cell lines, but stronger
expression was observed in the 2 more aggressive cell lines demonstrating lower basal levels. To
evaluate whether sulforaphane-mediated induction of Cx43 expression was accompanied by enhanced
GJIC, we microinjected Lucifer Yellow into untreated or sulforaphane-treated BxPc-3-GEM cells. Video
analysis of dye diffusion and the analysis of gray values revealed that sulforaphane increased GJIC
(Fig. 6B). The results of electron microscopy correlated with these findings, as the contrasting
material in gap-like structures between neighboring AsPC-1 cells was diminished after sulforaphane
treatment (Fig. 6C) compared to untreated AsPC-1 cells (Fig. 2C). Finally, inhibition of GSK3, PKC
and JNK by the inhibitors BIO, staurosporine and SP600125, respectively, diminished the
sulforaphane-induced expression of total Cx43 and of Cx43 phosphorylated at Ser 368 as shown in
AsPC-1 cells (Fig. 6D). This result, together with the finding that sulforaphane influences the
phosphorylation of numerous kinases and their substrates in a time-dependent manner (Fig. S4)
suggests that postranslation phosphorylation is involved in enhanced expression of Cx43. In
contrast, sulforaphane did not upregulate Cx43 mRNA expression, as measured by qRT-PCR (Fig. S5);
did not increase the demethylation of the Cx43 promoter, as measured by quantitative methylation
analysis of the GJA1 (Cx43) gene (Fig. S6); and did not enhance the binding of
acetylated histones to the GJA1 promoter as measured by chromatin
immunoprecipitation of acetylated histones 3 and 4 followed by the analysis of several regions
surrounding the GJA1 transcription start site by qPCR (Fig. S7). Remarkably,
enhanced methylation of the Cx43 promoter in untreated AsPC-1 cells compared to BxPc-3 and
BxPc-3-GEM cells was detected (Fig. S6), which may be responsible for the non-detectable expression
of Cx43 mRNA in AsPC-1 cells (Fig. S5). Therefore, elevated Cx43 protein levels after sulforaphane
were most likely due to the altered phosphorylation and stabilization of Cx43 protein; although the
phosphorylation pattern of Cx43 varied between cell lines, which is in line with a recent report
[31].
Figure 6
Sulforaphane enhances GJIC and Cx43 protein expression, which is prevented by inhibition of
kinase activity
(A) BxPc-3, BxPc-3-GEM and AsPC-1 cells were left untreated or were treated with sulforaphane
(SF, 10 mM) and time points indicated. The proteins of all treatment groups were harvested at
the same time point, and Western blot analysis was performed using antibodies to detect total Cx43
with an antibody, which does not detect Cx43 phosphorylated at Ser 368 (Invitrogen), Cx43
phosphorylated at Ser 368 (Abcam), Cx43 phosphorylated at Ser 279/282, E-cadherin and
b-Actin. (B) BxPc-3 cells were treated with sulforaphane (SF, 10 mM) or were left
untreated (CO). Twenty-four hours later, the cells were analyzed as described in Fig. 5B. The mean
gray values of the 1st and 2nd neighbors of all time points are shown. (C)
Electron microscopy of AsPC-1 cells, which were left either untreated or were treated with
sulforaphane (SF, 10 mM) for 24 h, was performed as described in Fig. C. (D) AsPC-1 cells
were left untreated or were treated with sulforaphane (SF, 10 mM) in the presence or absence
of the GSK3-inhibitor BIO (10 mM), the PKC-inhibitor staurosporine (100 nM) or the
JNK-inhibitor SP600125 (10 mM). Treatment with the inhibitors alone or with the solvent DMSO
served as control. Proteins were harvested 24 h after treatment and the expression of total Cx43,
Cx43 phosphorylated at Ser 368 and b-Actin was examined by Western blot analysis.
To further highlight these findings in primary CSC-marker-positive cells, we selected primary
CSCs by transplantation of freshly resected PDA tissue from two patients to immunodeficient mice.
For enrichment of CSCs we subtransplanted the xenografts for several rounds. During
subtransplantation, the tumor morphology and tumor stroma were largely preserved, as ensured by
Trichrome staining of the primary tumors and its xenografts (Fig. 7A and data not shown), whereas
the latency and the tumor take rate increased (data not shown). Accordingly, the CSC marker c-Met
was enriched from 17% in the primary tumor to 32% in xenografts at passage 3. The expression of Cx43
phosphorylated at Ser 368 was also detected in the primary tumor tissue and its xenografts; however,
quantitative evaluation was not possible due to the expression of Cx43 between neighboring cells. To
examine the effect of sulforaphane on CSC features, we further enriched CSC-marker positive cells
from passage 7 xenografts of the 2 patient tumors by isolation of tumor cells and in
vitro spheroidal culture (Fig. 7B). This culture technique favored the growth of CSCs,
because the ability to grow anchorage-independent is considered as a property of CSCs, and this is
reflected by the enhanced expression of the CSC markers c-Met (~ 75%) and CD133 (~ 80%), as detected
by the preparation of cytospins and immunohistochemistry (Fig. 7C). Moreover, the treatment of the
spheroidal cultures with sulforaphane for 24 h increased the expression level of Cx43 phosphorylated
at Ser 368, E-cadherin and active caspase 3, whereas the levels of c-Met and CD133 decreased. These
results demonstrate that Cx43 expression is low in primary CSCs, but can be increased by
sulforaphane treatment, which is associated with inhibition of CSC and EMT markers and induction of
apoptosis.
Figure 7
Sulforaphane induces Cx43 and inhibits CSC characteristics in primary CSCs
(A) Staining of patient-derived frozen tissue from a ductal adenocarcinoma (Primary Tumor 22) and
it's derived xenograft from passage 3 (Xenograft P3) with Trichrome, c-Met or Cx43
phosphorylated at Ser 368 (Abcam), followed by microscopical evaluation under 400x
magnification. The scale bar indicates 50 mm. (B) Representative picture of an
anchorage-independent growing spheroidal culture established from a mouse xenograft derived from the
primary patient tumor 22. The percentage of expression of the CSC markers c-Met and CD133 was
determined as described in part C and is indicated. (C) One week after in vitro
spheroidal culture, cells derived from pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma 22 and 30 were left
untreated or were treated with sulforaphane (10 mM). Twenty-four hours later, the cells were
cytospinned to glass slides, and the expression of Cx43 phosphorylated at Ser 368 (Abcam), c-Met,
CD133, E-cadherin and the cleaved, active fragment of Caspase-3 was examined by
immunohistochemistry. The number of positive cells was quantified in 10 vision fields under
400x magnification and the means +- SD are shown in the diagrams. **p<0.01,
*p<0.05.

DISCUSSION
We examined GJIC in human pancreatic cells and tissues and found a direct correlation among low
Cx43 protein levels, blocked GJIC, gemcitabine resistance, CSC features and EMT marker expression.
In particular, less malignant and GJIC-competent BxPc-3 cells expressed Cx43 protein at a high level
on the cell surface and showed morphologically intact GJs; however, Cx43 was not expressed in highly
malignant AsPC-1 cells with blocked GJIC and morphologically non-functional GJs. BxPc-3-GEM cells
were intermediate malignant subclones of BxPc-3 cells and exhibited weaker expression of Cx43, which
was primarily localized to the cytoplasm rather than to the cell surface. These findings suggest
that cytoplasmic localization of Cx43 induces the dysregulation of GJs by Cx43 withdrawal from the
cell membrane during early tumor progression (BxPc-3-GEM), which may be followed by complete
silencing of Cx43 expression in later tumor stages (AsPC-1). In this regard, changes in Cx43
expression and localization during pancreatic cancer progression have been recently described in the
murine system and suggest a potential role for GJs and Cx43 in mediating interactions between and
amongst the stromal and epithelial cells [32]. Another
suggested mechanism for Cx43 translocation from the cell surface, along with the reduction of GJIC,
involves the hypophosphorylation of Cx43, as demonstrated in oncogene-transformed rat liver
epithelial cells and the occurrence of phosphorylated (P1, P2
P2', P3) and unphosphorylated P0 Cx43
immunoreactive bands in Western blot analysis [33]. This
hypothesis corresponds to our stainings of human pancreatic cancer tissues, in which the high
expression of Cx43 phosphorylated at Ser 368 and Ser 279/282 was detected in non-malignant tissue
only. The key phosphorylation events at different Cx43 serine residues responsible for regulating
the GJ life cycle are complex and differentially regulated between different cell types and amino
acid residues, and were therefore not examined in detailed in the present report. However, the
underlying signaling pathways of Cx43 phosphorylation appear to involve MAPK activity [31]. In this regard, the activity of JNK, ERK and p38 MAP kinases
and the subsequent enhanced phosphorylation of Cx43 have been shown to inhibit Cx43 protein
expression [25, 34].
In our studies, the sulforaphane-mediated elevated levels of Cx43 were prevented by inhibitors of
GSK3, JNK and PKC, which suggests the involvement of these kinases in phosphorylation of Cx43, which
may lead to enhanced protein levels. This suggestion is underlined by our finding that sulforaphane
influenced the phosphorylation patterns of several kinases and their substrates in a time-dependent
manner.
To demonstrate the strong impact of Cx43 on GJIC in pancreatic cancer, we inhibited Cx43
expression by siRNA transfection in GJIC-competent BxPc-3 cells, leading to a completely abrogated
GJIC, which was associated with a higher basal viability, resistance to gemcitabine, enhanced
clonogenic potential and the induction of stem cell-associated factors. This finding is supported by
observations made by Yu and colleagues [23], who identified
the expression of Cx43 in more differentiated and GJIC-competent human glioma cells, while glioma
stem cells were GJIC-incompetent and Cx43 negative. Hence, adenoviral reconstitution of Cx43
expression in glioma stem cells inhibited their capacity for self-renewal, invasiveness and
tumorigenicity by influencing E-cadherin expression [23]. As
an underlying mechanism for reduced Cx43 expression in glioma stem cells, these previous authors
suggested that hypermethylation of the promoter of the GJ protein a1, which encodes Cx43
[23], may regulate this process. This hypothesis was
evaluated by measuring the immunoprecipitation of methylated DNA (MeDIP) followed by PCR
amplification of 2 potentially methylated regions in the GJA1 (Cx43) promoter. We
confirmed this result in our system and used quantitative EpiTYPER methylation profiling of the
region surrounding the Cx43 transcription start site. We also detected enhanced
Cx43 promoter methylation in CSC-like AsPC-1 cells compared to the less malignant
BxPc-3 and BxPc-3-GEM cells. Thus, strongly enhanced promoter methylation of Cx43 may be responsible
for the observed absent RNA and protein expression of Cx43 in AsPC-1 cells. However, it remains
unclear how dysfunctional GJIC supports a CSC phenotype and tumor progression. A reasonable
explanation is that dysfunctional GJIC prevents influences from surrounding normal tissue cells
[35], thereby enabling CSCs to escape growth control
mechanisms and apoptosis induction [20, 36].
We demonstrated that sulforaphane stimulated the elevated expression of defective Cx43 in
established and primary models of pancreatic CSCs along with the restoration of defective GJIC, the
activation of E-cadherin protein and the inhibition of the CSC markers CD133 and c-Met. A main
underlying mechanism for these observations may be postranscriptional phosphorylation, because
inhibition of GSK3, JNK and PCS inhibited the sulforaphane-induced expression of Cx43 and
sulforaphane influenced the phosphorylation of several kinases and their substrates. We did not
observe an effect of sulforaphane on Cx43 RNA expression, promoter methylation or promoter binding
of acetylated histones; therefore, the epigenetic regulation of Cx43 expression by sulforaphane may
be excluded. However, our data do not exclude the possibility that sulforaphane generally affects
epigenetic regulation, as demonstrated by our Western blot experiments showing enhanced acetylation
of histones 3 and 4 after sulforaphane treatment of PDA cells. In addition, work by others has
demonstrated the inhibition of DNA methyltransferase and histone deacetylase by sulforaphane [37, 38]. Our results also do
not exclude the involvement of histone acetylation in the basal regulation of Cx43 expression in
pancreatic cancer, which has been suggested by a recent study showing that the HDAC inhibitor
4-phenylbutyrate increases Cx43 expression and suppresses the growth of human pancreatic cancer
cells [26].
The present data demonstrate that reduced Cx43 protein levels are major mediators of blocked
GJIC, which confer a CSC-like phenotype in PDA. However, dietary sulforaphane enhances Cx43 protein
levels, restores GJIC and inhibits CSC features; therefore, a diet rich in cruciferous vegetables
containing sulforaphane and related mustard oils may be considered as a supportive nutritional
strategy to enhance therapeutic efficacy in patients suffering from pancreatic cancer.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Established Cell Lines
Established human BxPc-3 and AsPC-1 PDA cell lines and immortalized CRL-4023 hTERT-HPNE human PDA
cells were obtained from ATCC. BxPc-3-GEM subclones were selected from parental BxPc-3 cells by
continuous culturing in increasing concentrations of gemcitabine up to 100 nM for several months.
Cells were cultured in DMEM (PAA, Pasching; Austria) supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated FCS
(Sigma-Aldrich, Steinheim; Germany) and 25 mmol/L HEPES (PAA, Pasching; Austria). Cells were
authenticated by a commercial service (Multiplexion, Heidelberg, Germany). Monthly tests ensured a
mycoplasma-free cell culture.
Reagents
A 126 mM gemcitabine solution (Eli Lilly, Indianapolis, IN, USA) used for patients was diluted in
cell culture medium to a 100 mM stock solution. The gap junction inhibitor
18a-glycyrrhetinic acid (18GA; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO; USA) [39] was diluted in DMSO to a 70 mM stock. D,L-sulforaphane (>90% pure,
Sigma-Aldrich, Steinheim; Germany) was dissolved to create a 50 mM stock solution in EtOH.
5-Aza-2'-deoxycytidine (>97% pure, Sigma) was dissolved in acetic acid:water (1:1) to
create a 50 ng/ml stock solution. The GSK-3 inhibitor BIO and the JNK-inhibitor SP600125
(Selleckchem.com, Munchen, Germany) were dissolved in DMSO to 10 mM stocks and the
PKC-inhibitor staurosporine (Selleckchem.com) was dissolved in DMSO to a 1 mM stock. The final
concentrations of the solvents in medium were 0.1% or less.
Primary Antibodies
Rabbit polyclonal antibodies (pAbs) were used against Cx32, Cx26 (Invitrogen, Camarillo,
California; USA), c-Met, total Cx43 (#3512, Cell Signaling Technology, Boston, MA, USA), Cx43
phosphorylated at Ser 368 (#ab47368; Abcam, Cambridge, UK), Cx45 phosphorylated at Ser 279/282
(Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc. Heidelberg, Germany), Cx45, CD44 (GeneTex, Irvine, California, USA),
acetyl-Histone H3 and acetyl-Histone H4 (Merck Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany), E-cadherin (Cell
Signaling), Ki67 (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA) and the cleaved fragment of activated human
caspase-3 (R&D Systems, Abingdon, UK). Mouse monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) were used against
Cx36, total Cx43 (which does not detect Cx43 phosphorylated at Ser 368, #138300; Invitrogen,
Camarillo, California; USA), CD133 (Abcam), b-Actin (Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA), EpCAM and
the epithelial glycoprotein Egp34 (kindly provided by G. Moldenhauer and described [40]). Another rabbit monoclonal antibody (mAb) was used to detect
Cx43 phosphorylated at Ser 368 (#GTX48551 (Gene Tex (Irvine, California, USA).
Primary Spheroidal Cells
Surgical non-diagnostic specimens were mechanically minced, and 2x107 cells
placed in Matrigel were transplanted to the flanks of 6-week-old NMRI (nu/nu) female mice. The tumor
take rate was 60%, and after the development of a tumor, the xenografts were resected, minced and
subtransplanted to new mice. Subtransplantation was repeated until stably growing xenograft lines
after passage 3 were obtained. Pancreatic cancer spheres were generated from 2 established xenograft
lines, as recently described [4, 41], and the primary spheroidal cultures were used for experiments between days 7
and 30 of culture. Patient material was obtained under the approval of the ethical committee of the
University of Heidelberg after written informed consent was obtained from patients. Diagnoses were
established by conventional clinical and histological criteria according to the World Health
Organization (WHO). All surgical resections were indicated according to the principles and practice
of oncological therapy. Animal experiments were also approved by the ethical committee.
Microinjection of Lucifer Yellow
The tip of an ultrathin self-made glass pipette was positioned in the intracellular space of a
single cell in a subconfluent cell layer in 35-mm dishes. The position was controlled by measuring
the membrane potential via the wire in the pipette and the ground electrode in the culture medium.
Lucifer Yellow dye (Sigma Aldrich, Germany) was injected with a customized iontophoresis device for
90 s at a constant current of 10 nA. The distribution of Lucifer Yellow was examined by fluorescence
microscopy (Zeiss, Oberkochen; Germany) in combination with a CCD Kappa CF 15 DRE camera (Kappa
GmbH, Gleichen, Germany) and a video recorder, as recently described [42]. Pictures were extracted from the videos between the onset (t = 0 s) and the
end of the injection (t = 100 s). The fluorescence signal was analyzed at 100 s by calculating the
gray values of the directly injected cell and the 1st and 2nd cellular
neighbors using customized image data processing software (Histo 3.0, University Hospital
Heidelberg, Germany). The gray value of the directly injected cells was set to 100%, and the gray
value of the 10th neighboring cell was set to 0%. To block GJIC, the cells were treated
with 10 mM 18a-glycyrrhetinic acid (18aGA; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO; USA)
30 min prior to microinjection.
Electron Microscopy
Cells were processed for electron microscopy according to standard procedures. Briefly, the
3-step fixation process included 1 h on ice in 2.5% glutaraldehyde (EM-grade, Sigma) buffered to pH
7.2 with 40 mM Na-cacodylate, 2.4 mM MgCl2, 50 mM KCl and 58 mM sucrose, followed by 1 h
on ice in 1% aqueous OsO4 and overnight at 4degC in 0.5% aqueous uranyl acetate.
After dehydration in graded steps of ethanol, the adherent cells were flat-embedded in epoxy resin
(Polysciences, Eppelheim, Germany). Ultrathin sections parallel to the substrate-plane were prepared
at a 40-nm nominal thickness, post-stained in Reynold's lead citrate and 4% aqueous uranyl
acetate and viewed with an EM900 transmission electron microscope (Zeiss, Oberkochen, Germany) at 80
kV. Images were captured on image plates at 16,000x primary magnification and were scanned
with a 15-mm step-size (Ditabis Micron, Pforzheim, Germany).
Antibody Protein Array
Nitrocellulose membranes, on which capture antibodies were spotted, and reagents for detection
were obtained as a kit (Human pluripotent stem cell antibody array, Human phospho-kinase array) from
R&D Systems(r)(Wiesbaden, Germany). According to the manufacturer's instructions,
protein extracts were prepared and then incubated with the nitrocellulose membranes, and specific
protein binding was detected with biotinylated secondary antibodies using streptavidin-HRP and
chemiluminescence detection reagents.
Protein Isolation and Western Blot Analysis
Whole-cell extracts were prepared using a standard protocol, and proteins were detected by
Western blot analysis using specific primary antibodies as described above. Goat anti-rabbit or goat
anti-mouse secondary antibodies conjugated to horseradish peroxidase (HRP) (Santa Cruz, CA; USA) and
Luminata Forte Western HRP Substrate (Millipore Corporation, Billerica, MA; USA) were used for
detection.
MTT Assay
Cells were seeded in 96-well plates at 4x103 cells/well and treated with
gemcitabine 24 h later. After an additional 72 h, viability was determined using the
3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay, as previously described
[8].
Annexin Staining and FACS Analysis of Apoptosis
Apoptosis was detected by annexin staining and flow cytometry as previously described [43] using a BD LSR II flow cytometer and FACS Diva software (BD
Biosciences, San Jose, CA; USA). Specific apoptosis was evaluated with the following formula:
100x [(experimental apoptosis %) - (spontaneous apoptosis of CO %)] / [100 - spontaneous
apoptosis of CO %].
FACS Analysis of GJIC
FACS analysis of GJIC was performed as recently described [30]. In brief, 3x105 cells/well in a 6-well plate were labeled for 30 min
at 37degC with 3 mM Calcein-AM (Acetoxymethyl ester; Merck, Darmstadt; Germany) or 5
mM CellTracker Red CMTPX (Invitrogen, Eugene, Oregon; USA) diluted in Opti-MEM medium
(Invitrogen). Calcein-loaded donor cells were trypsinized and plated on top of the CellTracker
Red-stained acceptor cells at a ratio of 1:10. After 6 h of co-incubation, cells were trypsinized,
and single- and double-fluorescent cells were evaluated by FACS analysis.
Colony Forming Assay
Three days after siRNA transfection, 1x103 BxPc-3-GEM cells/well were seeded
into 6-well tissue culture plates (BD Falcon(tm), San Jose, CA, USA), and colony forming
assays were performed as previously described [44].
The Gemcitabine Bystander Effect
Cells were cultured in T75 flasks at concentrations of 4 to 6x106 cells per
flask. Confluent cells were left untreated or were treated with 3 mm gemcitabine for 24 h.
Treated cells were mixed at a ratio of 1:1 with untreated cells and were seeded in 6-well plates at
a concentration of 7x105 cells/ml. Twenty-four hours later, the cells were
trypsinized and seeded at a concentration of 4x104 cells/ml. Next, at 24 or 72 h
after co-cultivation, viability was measured using the MTT assay. Untreated cells were used as a
control and set to 100%. To measure GJIC by flow cytometry, untreated cells were stained with
CellTracker Red CMTPX (Invitrogen, Eugene, Oregon; USA), co-cultured and subjected to annexin
staining and FACS analysis of gated CellTracker Red-labeled cells only.
Immunohistochemistry of Established Cell Lines
Immunofluorescence staining was performed in established cell lines growing in chambers of the
Nunc(r) Lab-Tek Chamber Slide(tm) system (Sigma-Aldrich). According to a standard protocol,
95% EtOH served as a fixative, and 0.2% Triton X-100 was used for permeabilization [45]. Nuclei were stained with DAPI
(4,6-diamidino-2'-phenylindol, 1 mg/ml). The binding of primary antibodies was
detected using the following secondary Abs: goat anti-rabbit Alexa Fluor 488 IgG, goat anti-rabbit
Alexa Fluor 594 IgG, goat anti-mouse Alexa Fluor 594 IgG and goat anti-mouse Alexa Fluor 488 IgG
(Invitrogen, Camarillo, CA; USA). Omission of the primary Ab served as a negative control. The
signal was detected using a Leica DMRB fluorescence microscope (Leica, Wetzlar; Germany). Images of
representative fields were captured using a SPOT(tm) FLEX 15.2 64 Mp shifting pixel digital
color camera (Diagnostic, Instruments, Inc. USA) and analyzed with SPOT Basic/Advanced 4.6
software.
Immunohistochemistry of Primary Tissue and Primary Cells
Frozen 6-mm tissue sections from normal and malignant human pancreas tissue obtained from
healthy organ donors, patients with PDA, primary mouse xenografts or spheroidal cultures cytospinned
to glass slides were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde. Peroxidase activity was blocked with 0.03%
hydrogen peroxide. Immunohistochemistry was performed using EnVision+System-HRP (AEC)
(DakoCytomation, Carpinteria, CA; USA). After staining with primary antibodies, the signal was
detected as described above for the established cell lines. The omission of the primary Abs was used
as a negative control. Patient material was obtained under the approval of the ethical committee of
the University of Heidelberg. Diagnoses were established by conventional clinical and histological
criteria according to the World Health Organization (WHO). All surgical resections were indicated
according to the principles and practice of oncological therapy.
siRNA Transfection
siRNA against Cx43 (Hs_GJA1_5) was obtained from Qiagen (Maryland; USA), and Mission siRNA
Universal Negative Control was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO; USA). Transfections were
performed using the Lipofectamine(tm) RNAiMax kit from Invitrogen (Carlsbad, CA; USA) according
to the manufacturer's instructions.
Statistical Analysis
Data obtained with established and primary cell lines, with the exception of antibody protein
arrays, are presented as the mean +- SD of at least three separate experiments, performed in
triplicates. Statistical significance was evaluated by Student's t-test with Bonferroni
correction (*p<0.05, **p<0.01). Antibody protein arrays were performed twice in
duplicates with similar outcome and the means of two experiments are shown.

SUPPLEMENTARY FIGURES AND TABLES
