[Abstract, Results, Discussion, Methods]

Differential activity of GSK-3 isoforms regulates NF-kB and TRAIL- or
TNFa induced apoptosis in pancreatic cancer cells. While TRAIL is a promising anticancer agent due to its ability to selectively induce apoptosis in neoplastic cells, many tumors, including pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA), display intrinsic resistance, highlighting the need for TRAIL-sensitizing agents. Here we report that TRAIL-induced apoptosis in PDA cell lines is enhanced by pharmacological inhibition of glycogen synthase kinase-3 (GSK-3) or by shRNA-mediated depletion of either GSK-3a or GSK-3b. In contrast, depletion of GSK-3b, but not GSK-3a, sensitized PDA cell lines to TNFa-induced cell death. Further experiments demonstrated that TNFa-stimulated IkBa phosphorylation and degradation as well as p65 nuclear translocation were normal in GSK-3b-deficient MEFs. Nonetheless, inhibition of GSK-3b function in MEFs or PDA cell lines impaired the expression of the NF-kB target genes Bcl-xL and cIAP2, but not IkBa. Significantly, the expression of Bcl-xL and cIAP2 could be reestablished by expression of GSK-3b targeted to the nucleus but not GSK-3b targeted to the cytoplasm, suggesting that GSK-3b regulates NF-kB function within the nucleus. Consistent with this notion, chromatin immunoprecipitation demonstrated that GSK-3 inhibition resulted in either decreased p65 binding to the promoter of BIR3, which encodes cIAP2, or increased p50 binding as well as recruitment of SIRT1 and HDAC3 to the promoter of BCL2L1, which encodes Bcl-xL. Importantly, depletion of Bcl-xL but not cIAP2, mimicked the sensitizing effect of GSK-3 inhibition on TRAIL-induced apoptosis, whereas Bcl-xL overexpression ameliorated the sensitization by GSK-3 inhibition. These results not only suggest that GSK-3b overexpression and nuclear localization contribute to TNFa and TRAIL resistance via anti-apoptotic NF-kB genes such as Bcl-xL, but also provide a rationale for further exploration of GSK-3 inhibitors combined with TRAIL for the treatment of PDA.

Results
Isoform-specific GSK-3 depletion sensitizes PDA cells differentially to
TNFa- and TRAIL-induced apoptosis
To provide a baseline for subsequent combination studies, we examined the effect of a
potent and specific GSK-3i (LY2064827) on pancreatic cancer cell growth. We observed
growth inhibition in all tested cell lines (Supplementary Figures
S1a-e) with IC50s ranging from 50 nM to
5 mM after a 72-hour treatment (Supplementary
Figure S1f). We next tested the effect of GSK-3i on TNFa and
TRAIL-induced apoptosis (Figure 1). At concentrations that
had little impact by themselves, GSK-3i enhanced TNFa-induced cell death
as assessed by MTS assay, DNA fragmentation, annexin V binding and PARP cleavage
(Figures 1a, c, e and g). Likewise, GSK-3i enhanced
TRAIL-induced apoptosis in all PDA cell lines tested as demonstrated by DNA
fragmentation, annexin V binding and PARP as well as CASP3 cleavage (Figures 1b, d, f, h and I and Supplementary Figure
S2). This sensitization occurred with minimal effect on DR4 or DR5 mRNA
expression and little if any change in cell surface levels of these receptors (Supplementary Figure S3).
Because GSK-3 inhibitors, including LY2064827, do not discriminate between the two
GSK-3 isoforms, we knocked down each GSK-3 isoform selectively using multiple lentiviral
shRNA constructs (Figure 2a and Supplementary Figure S4a). Interestingly, GSK-3b, but not
GSK-3a supression, led to increased TNFa-induced
apoptosis, as manifested by increased PARP and CASP3 cleavage as well as annexin V
binding (Figures 2a, b and f and Supplementary Figure S4b). Consistent with this observation, more
apoptosis was observed in GSK-3b-null mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs)
than in wild-type (WT) MEFS after TNFa treatment (Figures 2c and f). In contrast, suppression of either GSK-3a
or GSK-3a sensitized similarly to TRAIL-induced apoptosis in Panc04.03
and HupT3 cells (Figures 2d, e and g). Similar enhancement
of TRAIL-induced apoptosis was observed using two additional GSK-3a or
GSK-3b lentiviral shRNA construct (Supplementary
Figures S4b and c). These results point to a unique role for
GSK-3b in suppressing TNFa-induced apoptosis, whereas
both GSK-3a and GSK-3b contribute to TRAIL resistance in
pancreatic cancer cells.
GSK-3b is not essential for TNFa-induced p65 nuclear
translocation
To determine how GSK-3 modulation affects death ligand signaling, we started by
evaluating the effect of GSK-3b deletion on key steps of
NF-kB activation. TNFa-treatment of either WT or
GSK-3b-null MEFs resulted in robust IkBa
phosphorylation by 5 min and loss of total IkBa protein by
15 min (Figure 3a), with robust accumulation of p65
in the nucleus by 20 min in both cell lines (Figure
3b). The pattern and extent of nuclear p65 oscillations were also similar at
extended periods following TNFatreatment (Figures 3c
and d). Taken together, these results suggest that GSK-3b is
not essential for either the initial wave of IkBa degradation
leading to p65 nuclear entry or the subsequent IkBa gene expression
that drives the kinetics of the p65 nuclear oscillations.
Because the predominant form of NF-kB in the cytosol in resting cells
and in the nucleus upon NF-kB activation is a p50/p65 heterodimer, we
further investigated the effect of GSK-3b on p50/p65 interactions
using a proximity ligation assay (PLA), a highly sensitive technique to detect
protein-protein interactions in situ. As predicted, the p50/p65
interactions were observed almost exclusively in the cytosolic compartment in resting
cells, mainly in the nucleus 20 min after TNFa exposure, and
largely in the cytosol again at 60 min (Figures 3e and
f). There was no significant difference in the number or the sites of
p50/p65 interactions following TNFa exposure in WT versus
GSK-3b null MEFs (Figures 3e and f).
Accordingly, GSK-3b deficiency does not appear to impact
TNFa-induced canonical NF-kB activation up to the point
of p50/p65 nuclear entry.
Isoform-specific regulation of BCL2L1 and BIRC3 by GSK-3 in
pancreatic cancer cells
In further experiments, we examined the effects of GSK-3i and isoform-specific shRNA on
NF-kB target genes that affect the DR pathway. Dose-response
experiments demonstrated that concentrations of 200-1000 nM GSK-3i
decreased phosphorylation of GSK-3a/b Y276/Y216 and glycogen
synthase S641 (Figure 4a), increased nuclear accumulation of
b-catenin (Figure 4b), and increased
activity of pLenti-TopFlash Luciferase reporter (Figure 4c),
which reflects b-catenin nuclear accumulation. The same 500 nM
GSK-3i concentration that produced near-maximal pLenti-TopFlash Luciferase activation
(Figure 4c) decreased expression of Bcl-xL, cIAP2 and
cFlip (both long and short isoforms), while IkBa and
Bcl-2, and XIAP were not affected (Figure 4d).
Interestingly, in cells expressing GSK-3 isoform-specific shRNA, Bcl-xL and cIAP2 were
decreased with GSK-3b, but not withGSK-3a suppression
(Figure 4e and data not shown). cFlip, however, was not
reduced by either GSK-3a or GSK-3b shRNA, suggesting that
both kinases might need to be inhibited to affect this protein.
GSK-3b modulates NF-kB binding and cofactor
recruitment at the BCL2L1 and BIRC3 promoters
The preceding results suggest that GSK-3b, but not GSK-3a
modulates a subset of NF-kB target genes. This possibility was further
evaluated by qRT-PCR and chromatin immunoprecipitation (Figure
5). qRT-PCR revealed that IkBa mRNA increased
more than 20-fold following a 45-min TNFa treatment in both WT and
GSK-3b null MEF cells (Figure 5a). In
contrast, Bcl-xL and cIAP2 mRNA levels increased in WT MEFs but not
GSK-3b-null MEFs (Figure 5a). These
alterations in transcript levels largely correlated to protein expression changes as
determined by immunoblotting (Supplementary Figure S5).
Depletion of GSK-3b in Panc04.03 cells similarly impaired
TNFa-induced expression of Bcl-xL and cIAP2 but spared
IkBa (Figure 5b). These
results indicate that GSK-3b loss does not globally impact
NF-kB transcriptional activity, but instead impairs the expression of a
specific set of NF-kB target genes.
As we found no gross defect in GSK-3b-null cells up to p65 nuclear entry,
we next examined whether GSK-3 may affect binding of p65 and p50 to the promoters. For
the IkBa promoter, we found no significant change in
either p65 or p50 loading or histone 4 lysine 16 acetylation (a marker of gene
activation) following GSK3i treatment (Figure 5c). In
contrast, at the promoter of the BIRC3 gene, which encodes cIAP2, p65 binding
and H4K16ac modification were significantly reduced, with only a marginal decrease in
p50 binding (Figure 5c). Unexpectedly, we detected increased
p50 binding at the promoter of the BCL2L1 gene, which encodes Bcl-xL
(Figure 5d), while p65 binding was only marginally
decreased (Figure 5e). Further analysis of the
BCL2L1 promoter indicated that GSK-3i treatment was also associated with
increased SIRT1 and HDAC3 loading along with reduced binding of lysine 310-acetylated
p65 and RNA pol II, indicating that the GSK-3i induced the formation of repressive
chromatin. These results suggest that GSK-3i may differentially impact p65 and/or
p50 binding and unloading from chromatin depending on the target gene promoter.
Nuclear GSK-3b contributes to Bcl-xL and cIAP2 expression
The preceding results not only show that GSK-3b modulates the effects of
NF-kB on a specific subset of its target genes, but also suggest that
these effects occur after NF-kB enters the nucleus. Consistent with these
results, we detected abundant nuclear GSK-3b in all pancreatic cancer cell
lines examined (Figure 6a). Moreover, nuclear
GSK-3b exhibited minimal S9 phosphorylation, an auto-inhibitory
modification, suggesting that the nuclear pool of GSK-3b is highly active
in these cells (Figure 6a). These results prompted us to
determine the role of nuclear GSK-3b in the regulation of these
NF-kB target genes. For this purpose, we generated a set of mammalian
suppression/re-expression plasmids that knocked down endogenous GSK-3b
and expressed modified GSK-3b that contained either a nuclear export
signal (NES) for cytoplasmic targeting or a nuclear localization signal (NLS) for
nuclear targeting. Immunofluorescence and cellular fractionation followed by
immunoblotting confirmed that GSK-3b(S9A).NES.F and
GSK-3b(S9A).NLS.F localized mainly to the cytoplasm and nucleus,
respectively (Figures 6b and c). Using this reconstituted
system, we investigated the effect of GSK-3b subcellular localization on
the expression of IkBa, Bcl-xL and cIAP2. Consistent with
our previous data, neither depletion of GSK-3b nor re-expression of a
cytosolic or nuclear form of GSK-3b affected
IkBa gene expression (Figure
6d). Interestingly, expression of cytosolic GSK-3b resulted in
reduced expression of both Bcl-xL and cIAP2 similar to that of GSK-3b
depletion (Figure 6d). In contrast, expression of either the
S9A mutant or the nuclear-localized GSK-3b resulted in increased
expression of both Bcl-xL and cIAP2 (Figure 6d). Taken
together, these data indicate that active nuclear GSK-3b has the potential
to regulate NF-kB target genes involved in cell survival.
Bcl-xL and XIAP, but not cIAP2, contribute to GSK-3i-mediated sensitization to
TRAIL- and TNFa-induced apoptosis
Bcl-xL, cIAP2 and XIAP are all important apoptotic regulators. To assess their roles in
TRAIL- and TNFa-induced apoptosis in PDA cells, we used lentiviral shRNA
to generate HupT3 cells with stable knockdown of each gene and determined their response
to TRAIL and TNFa (Figures 7a-c).
Suppression of XIAP as well as cIAP2 increased basal levels of apoptosis
(shXIAP=14.9%+-1.27 and shcIAP2=10.9%+-0.29
versus shcontrol=7.6%+-0.59). At the concentrations
studied, TRAIL induced more apoptosis than TNFa in scramble control.
Importantly, suppression of either Bcl-xL or XIAP markedly enhanced TRAIL-induced
apoptosis (25.7%+-1.0 and 28.5%+-2.9, respectively,
versus 16.2%+-1.9 in scrambled control). However, only shBcl-xL
cells displayed significantly increased sensitivity to TNFa
(16.5%+-0.6 versus 8.2%+-0.4 in diluent control),
whereas shXIAP cells exhibited higher spontaneous apoptosis, but no significant
enhancement of TNFa activity (15.2%+-1.3 versus
14.9%+-1.3 in diluent control). On the other hand, cIAP2 knockdown did not
affect either TRAIL (16.6%+-0.7 versus 16.2%+-1.9 in
shcontrol) or TNFa-induced apoptosis (11.4%+-1.2
versus 10.7%+-1.0 in shcontrol). These results highlight
potentially distinct roles for these anti-apoptotic proteins when apoptosis is initiated
by different stimuli and also indicate that only Bcl-xL is both regulated by
GSK-3b suppression or GSK-3i and contributes to TRAIL resistance. To
further examine if Bcl-xL actively participates in GSK-3i-mediated TRAIL sensitization,
we expressed Bcl-xL off an NF-kB- and GSK-3i-independent promoter in
BxPC-3 cells (Figure 7d) and measured apoptosis following
treatment with either GSK-3i or TRAIL (Figure 7e). Similar
to HupT3 cells, Bcl-xL knockdown BxPC-3 cells transduced with empty vector showed
markedly increased apoptotic induction following GSK-3i or TRAIL exposure (7.1 and
9.0% increase relative to diluent control (Figure 7e
upper panel). Importantly, Bcl-xL knockdown cells reconstituted with pLenti-Flag.Bcl-xL,
although yielding more spontaneous apoptosis (5.7% versus flag vectsor
1.1%), partially reversed GSK-3i and TRAIL-induced apoptosis (net increase of
apoptosis down from 10 to 4.7% and 16.1 to 3.3%, respectively) under the
same treatment conditions (Figure 7e, lower panel). These
results confirm that Bcl-xL downregulation contributes to GSK-3i-induced sensitization
to TRAIL.

Discussion
In this work, we examined the hypothesis that GSK-3 inhibition can overcome key
anti-apoptotic mechanism(s) associated with TRAIL resistance. The rationale behind this
combination was based on the premise that GSK-3i treatment downregulates the expression of
key anti-apoptotic proteins that mediate TRAIL resistance. A connection between
GSK-3b and TRAIL-induced apoptosis was first described in prostate cancer
cells, in which GSK-3 inhibition or GSK-3b suppression eliminated TRAIL
resistance.29 A more recent study reported a
similar caspase-dependent TRAIL sensitization involving the mitochondrial apoptotic
pathway in both prostate and pancreatic cancer cells.30 The present work not only confirmed that GSK-3 inhibition enhanced
TRAIL-induced apoptosis in various pancreatic cell lines, but also uncovered differential
effects of GSK-3 isoforms on TRAIL- and TNFa-induced cell death. Furthermore, our
results demonstrated a unique mechanism by which nuclear GSK-3 regulates the
NF-kB target genes BCL2L1 and BIRC3.
Most published work on GSK-3 has focused on GSK-3b, while much less is
known regarding the relative contribution of GSK-3a despite its widespread
tissue distribution.31, 32 Research using genetically engineered mouse models revealed that
GSK-3a and GSK-3b largely compensate for each other during
embryogenesis, as demonstrated for b-catenin via the Wnt
pathway.33 Nevertheless, isoform-specific
phenotypes have been reported, including the observation that GSK-3b loss
causes a defect in NF-kB activation and craniofacial
anomalies,21, 34 while GSK-3a loss results in premature death and
acceleration of age-related pathologies due to activation of mTORC1 and associated
suppression of autophagy markers.35 A recent
study has identified a distinct role for GSK-3a in noncanonical NF-kB
signaling via stabilization of TAK1-TAB downstream of oncogenic K-Ras.27, 32 These reports point
to GSK-3 isoform-specific effects on the regulation of NF-kB activity.
Because GSK-3a and GSK-3b share a highly homologous kinase
domain, the available GSK-3 kinase inhibitors, including LY2064827, do not distinguish
between the two isoforms.36 We used
isoform-specific lentiviral shRNA vectors to evaluate the role of each GSK-3 isoform in
TRAIL-induced apoptosis. Contrary to the reported minor effect of
GSK-3a,30 we showed that both
isoforms similarly contributed to TRAIL resistance in PDA cells. This discrepancy likely
arises from the efficiency of GSK-3a suppression. Our analysis utilized
multiple shRNAs, each of which achieved nearly complete suppression of
GSK-3a at both mRNA and protein levels and caused similar TRAIL
sensitization. Our data are also consistent with a previous report by Sun et
al.37, which identified GSK-3 (both
GSK-3a and 3b) as a component of an anti-apoptotic protein
complex with DDX3 and cIAP1 associated with DR5 in breast cancer cells.37 Although the precise mechanism and substrate(s) of
GSK-3 action within this membrane complex remain to be defined, GSK-3 inhibition was found
to overcome TRAIL resistance by promoting the initial step of DISC formation leading to
caspase-8 and caspase-3 activation.37 Our
results, which focused on another aspect of TRAIL killing, also point to an effect of both
GSK-3b isoforms in modulating TRAIL sensitivity.
In contrast to TRAIL, only GSK-3b suppression led to sensitization of
TNFa-induced cell death in PDA, an effect recapitulated in GSK-3b-null
MEFs. As the first report on genetic ablation of the murine GSK-3b gene
leading to a defect in NF-kB activation,21 the involvement of GSK-3b in NF-kB
signaling has been documented in many cell types. However, conflicting results have been
reported regarding the role of GSK-3b loss on NF-kB
activation, ranging from major defects in TNFa-induced
IkBa phosphorylation/degradation, to minimal or no effect on the
cytosolic signaling and p65 nuclear translocation.28,
38, 39, 40 Our group previously proposed that GSK-3b
exerts its effect on NF-kB at a point distal to activation of the IKK
complex in PDA cells, whereas a role of GSK-3b in maintaining constitutive
NF-kB signaling via IKK was also reported.25, 28 Here we provide evidence that
GSK-3b is basically dispensable during TNFa-induced
canonical NF-kB activation up to p65/p50 nuclear entry, and is only
involved in the regulation of a subset of genes such as BCL2L1 and
BIRC3, but not IkBa and several other NF-kB
target genes (Figures 4 and 5 and
data not shown).
Our observation that GSK-3b affects only a subset of NF-kB
target genes, raised the possibility that GSK-3b contributes to
NF-kB target gene expression in a promoter- or chromatin
context-dependent manner. In fact, GSK-3 inhibition in Panc04.03 cells affected
NF-kB binding to the BCL2L1 and BIRC3 promoters, but
not the IkBa promoter. Where present, the effects of GSK-3 inhibition
were characterized by either decreased p65 or increased p50 binding along with increased
HDAC3 and SIRT1 recruitment. The underlying mechanism is not presently clear, but may
involve posttranslational modification of NF-kB proteins, as
GSK-3b has been shown to phosphorylate both p65 and p50.24, 41, 42 GSK-3b has also been reported to phosphorylate and
regulate the processing/degradation of NF-kB1 (p105), the precursor of
p50 and, therefore, could alter levels of p50 in cells.43 Although detailed mechanism(s) underlying GSK-3b
regulation of NF-kB hetero- and homodimer formation and chromatin binding
remain to be further characterized, the difference in DNA binding specificity/affinity
as well as in transcriptional activity of NF-kB dimer forms may constitute
a mechanism for selective activation/repression of a subset of NF-kB
target genes.44, 45,
46 In light of our direct experimental evidence
that nuclear-localized GSK-3b can efficiently drive the expression of the
NF-kB target genes BCL2L1 and BIRC3 in pancreatic
cancer cells, it is of interest that many GSK-3b substrates are nuclear
transcription factors.20 As GSK-3b
is overexpressed and localized to nuclei in the majority of moderately and poorly
differentiated PDAs, it is tempting to speculate that, in addition to driving the
expression of select NF-kB target genes such as BCL2L1 and
BIRC3, nuclear GSK-3b might affect the action of other
transcription factors as well.
Among the key NF-kB-target anti-apoptotic proteins linked to TRAIL
resistance, cFLIP functions at the apex of death receptor initiated signaling by
preventing the recruitment and activation of caspase-8.47 A recent report has identified cFLIP (both long and short
isoforms) as a crucial negative regulator of death receptor-induced apoptosis in
pancreatic carcinoma cells.48 We initially found
that the long isoform of cFLlP is reduced in GSK-3i treated cells, but this was not
observed in either GSK-3a or GSK-3b knockdown cells,
suggesting a potential redundant role of GSK-3a or GSK-3b in
its regulation. Interestingly, suppression of Bcl-xL or XIAP, but not cIAP2, sensitized
PDA cells to TRAIL-induced apoptosis. Moreover, expression of Bcl-xL off a
GSK-3i-independent promoter could partially reverse the GSK-3i-induced TRAIL
sensitization. Our data, which are consistent with previous work showing that both Bcl-xL
and XIAP are important in mediating TRAIL resistance,7,
11, 49, 50, 51, 52 demonstrate that downregulation of Bcl-xL by GSK-3i or
GSK-3b suppression accounts for part of the GSK-3i-induced death ligand
sensitization in PDA cells.
The signaling cascades activating NF-kB pathways are attractive targets
for cancer therapy.7, 10, 22 However, the complex mechanisms
underlying constitutive NF-kB activation, including both canonical and
noncanonical pathways in PDA, require a combination of inhibitors in order to widely block
NF-kB activities to achieve therapeutic benefit. Results presented here
demonstrate that combining GSK-3i with TRAIL dramatically enhances TRAIL cytotoxicity in
pancreatic cancer cells. Our further studies show that GSK-3b in the nucleus
of pancreatic cancer cells contributes to TRAIL resistance by impacting binding of
NF-kB dimers to a subset of NF-kB-responsive promoters,
ultimately modulating the expression of specific anti-apoptotic NF-kB
target genes such as BCL2L1. The present findings, together with published work,
identify GSK-3-mediated mechanisms of TRAIL resistance at the plasma membrane and in the
nucleus. Taken together, these observations provide a strong rationale as well as a
molecular basis for further study of TRAIL in combination with GSK-3i in order to
potentially improve PDA therapy.

Materials and Methods
Regents and antibodies
GSK-3i (LY2064827) was obtained from Eli Lilly (Indianapolis, IN, USA). Recombinant
human TRAIL, human and mouse TNFa were purchased from R&D Systems
(Minneapolis, MN, USA). Fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-conjugated annexin V was from
Invitrogen (Carlsbad, CA, USA). Blasticidin and puromycin were obtained from InvivoGen
(San Diego, CA, USA). Antibodies from Cell Signaling Technologies (Beverly, MA, USA)
include rabbit monoclonal anti-GSK-3a/b (D75D3), Bcl-xL (54H6),
phospho-IKBaSer32/36) (5A5), p65 (D14E12), cFLIP and Cleaved
Caspase-3 (Asp175). Antibodies from Epitomics (Burlingame, CA, USA) include rabbit
monoclonal anti-GS, phospho-GS (pS641) and rabbit polyclonal anti-cIAP2. Antibodies from
BD PharMingen (San Diego, CA, USA) include mouse monoclonal anti-Bcl-2, XIAP,
GSK-3b, b-catenin, ORC2 and PARP. Antibodies from Santa
Cruz Biotechnology (Santa Cruz, CA, USA) include rabbit polyclonal anti-p65, p50,
IkBa and mouse monoclonal anti-p50. Mouse monoclonal
b-actin, g-tubulin, anti-FLAG M2 and M2 agarose were from
Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA).
Plasmid construction
For knockdown of endogenous gene expression, including GSK-3a,
GSK-3b, Bcl-xL, cIAP2 and XIAP, we used lentivirus-mediated short
hairpin RNA (shRNA) expression system (Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA).53 The plasmids were either constructed in pLKO.1 vector
or obtained from the Mayo Clinic RNA Interference Shared Resource (RISR). At least two
distinct shRNA target sequences for each gene with confirmed suppression (over
70% decrease at mRNA level relative to scrambled control) were used (Supplementary Table S1). For stable reconstituted expression of
Bcl-xL, we cloned its full-length coding region with an N-terminal Flag-tag in pLenti6.3
vector (Invitrogen). To generate GSK-3b mammalian
suppression/re-expression constructs, cDNA sequence
(5'-CACTGGTCACGTTTGGAAAGA-3') derived from human
GSK-3b 3' UTR region was first cloned as a hairpin into
pCMS4-eGFP-H1P vector.53 Human
GSK-3b protein coding region (both WT and constitutively active S9A
mutant) were subcloned into this pCMS4-eGFP-H1P-shGSK-3b vector at
MluI/NotI sites. For suppression/re-expression of cytosolic and
nuclear-localized GSK-3b, the stop codon was mutated and replaced with a
coding sequence for either NES from the human protein kinase inhibitor a
or 3 tandem copies of the NLS sequence from SV40 large T-antigen, which is followed by a
C-terminal Flag-tag. All cDNA and shRNA expression plasmids were verified by direct
sequencing at the Mayo Molecular Biology Core Facility.
Lentiviral packaging, transduction and selection of stable cells
Lentivirus packaging, cell infection and selection of pLKO-shRNA stable pancreatic
cancer cells with puromycin were performed as previously described following
institutional biosafety regulations.53 For
stable overexpression of BCL-XL in BxPC-3 cells, pLenti6.3-Flag.BCL-XL or
pLenti6.3-Flag.vector viral infected cells were selected in culture media supplemented
with blasticidin (5 mg/ml) for two passages (about 6 days) and
pooled blasticidin-resistant cells were used as stable overexpression cells. To generate
pLenti-TopFlash luciferase vector, we used pLenti6.3-Topo vector (Invitrogen) as a
backbone and replaced the ClaI and MluI fragment (containing the CMV promoter, Topo
cloning site the V5 tag coding sequence) with seven tandem copies of TCF/LEF binding
site followed by the firefly luciferase ORF amplified from pGL3E vector (Promega,
Madison, WI, USA). The resulting pLenti-7xTopFlash luciferase vector was packaged into
lentiviral particles and used for infection of 293T and BxPC-3 cells, respectively.
Blasticidin-selected stable cell clones were used in dual luciferase reporter
assays.
Cell culture/transfection, protein extraction and immunoblotting
GSK-3b-null mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) and matching WT MEFs were
a kind gift from Dr. Jim Woodgett (Ontario Cancer Institute, Toronto, ON,
Canada).21 HEK293T, HeLa and all
pancreatic cancer cell lines were obtained from ATCC, maintained
under recommended culture conditions and transfected as previously
described.53, 54,
55 Whole cell or nuclear/cytosolic
fractionated protein extracts were prepared, quantified and subject to SDS-PAGE and
immunoblotting.
Cell proliferation and apoptosis analysis
Proliferation of MEFs and pancreatic cancer cells was measured by MTS assay (Promega)
as described.53 To assess DNA fragmentation,
pancreatic cancer cells were incubated in buffer containing 0.1% (w/v) Triton
X-100, 50 mg/ml PI and 0.1% (w/v) sodium citrate overnight at
4 degC and analyzed by flow cytometry for subdiploid events. For annexin V5 and
PI staining, MEFs or pancreatic cancer cells were detached by trypsinization and stained
with annexin V labeled with FITC (eBioscience, San Diego, CA, USA) and propidium iodide
(PI, 1 mg/ml, Sigma) for 20 min. Cells (20 000 per condition)
were then analyzed on a Becton Dickinson FACS Caliber flow cytometer (Franklin Lakes,
NJ, USA) as described.56 The fraction of cells
positive for annexin V and/or PI was calculated using FlowJo software (Tree Star,
Ashland, OR, USA).54
Immunofluorescent staining, proximity ligation assay (PLA) and confocal
microscopy
For localization of endogenous p65 in MEFs, WT and GSK-3b-null MEFs were
grown on coverslips for 24 h and stimulated with 2 mg/ml
of TNFa for the indicated periods of time. Cells were fixed,
permeabilized, stained with rabbit monoclonal anti-p65 (1 : 300 dilution)
and analyzed via confocal microscopy as previously described.53 To detect subcellular distribution of GSK-3b,
Panc04.03 cells were transfected with in pCMS4-H1P-eGFP- GSK-3b vectors by
electroporation and grown on coverslips for 48 h before staining with mouse
monoclonal anti-flag M2 antibody (1 : 800). For PLA detection of
p50/p65 interaction in situ, we used the Duolink in situ PLA kit
from Olink Bioscience according to the supplier's instructions. Mouse mAb against
p50 (SC8414, Santa Cruz Biotechnology) and rabbit mAb against p65 (#8242, Cell
Signaling Technology) were used as primary antibodies at dilutions of
1 : 50 and 1 : 300, respectively. The anti-rabbit plus and
anti-mouse minus secondary antibodies were used as PLA probes and Texas red as detection
regent (Supplementary information).
Luciferase reporter assay
Luciferase reporter assays were performed as previously described.57 Firefly luciferase activity was normalized to Renilla
luciferase. The results were expressed as mean 'fold induction'. Mean values
of at least three independent experiments are displayed+-S.D.
RNA extraction and qRT-PCR
RNA extraction using the RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA), generation of
cDNA with Superscript III reverse transcription Kit (Invitrogen) and PCR using the
comparative CT method with the SYBR Green PCR Master Mix (Applied Biosystems, Grand
Island, NY, USA) and the ABI Prism 7900TM Sequence Detection System have previously been
described.53 Experiments were performed in
triplicate using three independent cDNAs. Primer sequences are in Supplementary Table S2.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays
Panc04.03 cells were treated with the GSK-3i LY2064827 (0.5 mM) or
diluent (DMSO) for 16 h. Treated cells were cross-linked and subjected to
chromatin immunoprecipitation as described.55
The following antibodies were used for ChIP: rabbit polyclonal antibodies to p65 and p50
(Santa Cruz Biotechnologies), monoclonal H3K14ac, RNA polymerase II and rabbit
polyclonal HDAC3 and SIRT1 (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA), rabbit polyclonal anti-p65
(acetylated K310), and anti-acetylated lysine (Abcam, Cambridge, MA, USA). Three sets of
qPCR primers were designed for IkBa, Bcl-xL and cIAP2
within promoter/enhancer or intergenic regions based on the location of
NF-kB binding sites. The result was first normalized to input or
control IgG, then to diluent control. Experiments were performed in triplicate. Primer
sequences are presented in Supplementary Table S3.
