[Abstract, Introduction, Methods, Results, Discussion]

B7-H3 overexpression in pancreatic cancer promotes tumor
progression. B7-H3, a member of the B7-family molecules, plays an important role in adaptive immune responses. In addition, B7-H3 is also expressed in several types of human cancers and is correlated with the poor outcome of cancer patients. However, its exact role in cancer is not known. In the present study, we compared B7-H3 expression in normal pancreas and pancreatic cancer tissue specimens, and determined the effects of low B7-H3 expression on the human pancreatic cancer cell line Patu8988 using lentivirus-mediated RNA interference. B7-H3 expression in pancreatic specimens was determined by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). A Patu8988 cell line with low B7-H3 expression was established by lentivirus-mediated RNA interference to investigate the effect of B7-H3 on cell proliferation, migration and invasion in vitro. By establishing subcutaneous transplantation tumor and orthotopic transplantation pancreatic cancer mouse models, the effect of B7-H3 on cell proliferation, migration and invasion was studied in vivo. B7-H3 in tissue samples was significantly higher in the pancreatic cancer group than in the normal pancreas group (mean +- SD, 193.6+-9.352 vs. 87.74+-7.433 ng/g; P<0.0001). B7-H3 knockdown by RNA interference decreased cell migration and Transwell invasion up to 50% in vitro. No apparent impact was observed on cell proliferation in vitro. In the subcutaneous transplantation tumor mouse model, the tumor growth rate was reduced by the knockdown of B7-H3. In the orthotopic transplantation pancreatic cancer mouse model, the effect of inhibiting metastasis by knocking down B7-H3 was assessed in terms of the average postmortem abdominal visceral metastatic tumor weight. This demonstrated that inhibition of B7-H3 expression reduced pancreatic cancer metastasis in vivo. In conclusion, B7-H3 is aberrantly expressed in pancreatic cancer. In addition to modulating tumor immunity, B7-H3 may have a novel role in regulating pancreatic tumor progression.

Introduction
Pancreatic cancer, a highly lethal disease, is always diagnosed at an advanced stage for
which there is little effective treatment. It remains the fourth most common cause of
cancer-related death in the Western world (1). Due to the aggressive nature of this disease, most patients with pancreatic
cancer present with local invasion or distant metastasis at the time of diagnosis, and less
than 20% of patients are candidates for surgery with curative intent (2). Metastatic pancreatic cancer is
relatively incurable. For pancreatic cancer, the overall 5 year survival rates are reported
to be below 5% (3). Thus,
understanding the molecular mechanisms of pancreatic cancer progression should be helpful to
develop efficient treatments for the disease. Among new approaches, gene therapy is
definitely required to improve treatment results (4-7).
B7-H3, a member of the B7 immunoregulatory family, was identified in 2001 by database
searches of a human dendritic cell derived cDNA library (8). Previous studies showed that B7-H3 protein can be expressed in
dendritic cells, and in the liver, lung, prostate as well as in similar tumor cell lines
(9-12). However, the physiological and
pathological role of B7-H3 is largely unknown. In an early study, human B7-H3 was reported
to be a co-stimulator of T cells, promoting T cell proliferation and cytokine production
(8). Subsequently, it was reported
that in several mouse cancer models, B7-H3 ectopic expression enhanced the induction of
tumor-specific CD8 cytotoxic T cells, which may slow tumor growth or even completely
eradicate tumors (13,14). More recently, B7-H3 was repeatedly
implicated as a potent inhibitor of T cell activity (15). Previous studies found that B7-H3 deficient mice show airway
inflammation (16), experimental
autoimmune encephalitis (17) and
allergic conjunctivitis in an accelerated pattern (18). In contrast to these studies, Steinberger et
al(10) suggested that
B7-H3 has no characteristics of a co-signaling molecule and it does not act as a regulator
of immune responses. Therefore, the biological functions of B7-H3 are still unclear.
Metastasis, the spread of cancer cells from the primary tumor sites to distant organs, is a
complex process that involves induction of cell motility, activation of extracellular matrix
proteases, intravasation to vessels, travel via the circulatory system, and survival and
establishment of secondary tumors in a new microenvironment (19,20). The
same process occurs in metastatic pancreatic cancer.
It has been suggested that B7-H3 is a tumor-associated antigen that regulates important
cellular responses, such as proliferation, adhesion and metastasis, indicating its novel
role in tumor progression (21,22). In this study, we focused on B7-H3
in pancreatic cancer tissue as well as in the human pancreatic cancer cell line
Patu8988.

Materials and methods
Reagents
The anti-human B7-H3 antibody was purchased from R&D Systems, Inc. The
horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary anti-mouse antibody was from Bio-Rad
Laboratories, Inc. TRIzol reagent and MMLV were purchased from Gibco-BRL. TaqDNA
polymerase, dNTPs and DNA marker were purchased from Takara.
Patients
This study was approved by the Ethics Committee of The First Affiliated Hospital of
Soochow University for Clinical Investigation. Included in the study were 26 patients with
pancreatic cancer who underwent surgery for radical resection. Patients were excluded from
analysis if they received chemotherapy or radiation therapy prior to the surgical
operation or underwent previous pancreatic surgery. Specimens of pancreatic cancer were
obtained from the patients during surgical operation, following written consent. At the
same time, specimens of normal pancreatic tissues distant to the tumor were obtained as
controls. The diagnosis of each tissue was confirmed by a frozen section stained with
hematoxylin and eosin. After dissection under sterile conditions, each tissue sample was
collected, separated and divided into 2 groups during preparation and analysis. One group
was fixed in 10% buffered methanol for immunohistochemical estimation of B7-H3
expression, and another group was used for B7-H3 enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
(ELISA).
Tissue extracts and B7-H3 enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA)
Each tissue sample was collected and weighed in the same manner during preparation.
Extract preparation was performed as recommended by the manufacturer (Cell Signaling
Technology). Briefly, each tissue sample was prepared with PBS and homogenized in cell
lysis buffer containing Protease Inhibitor Cocktail Set I (Calbiochem). After incubation
on ice for 30 min, the homogenate was centrifuged at 14,000 x g for 10 min at 4degC,
and the supernatant was collected for ELISA assay. ELISA kits produced at our laboratory
were used to measure B7-H3, as described previously (19). B7-H3 concentrations were determined using a standard curve
with an 8-parameter curve fit analysis program. We calculated the B7-H3 level/gram (g) of
each tissue sample.
Cells and cell culture
Pancreatic cancer cell line Patu8988 was kindly provided by Professor Chang-Geng Ruan
from the Jiangsu Provincial Institute of Hematology, China. Patu8988 cells were cultured
in RPMI-1640 (Gibco Inc.), and the medium was supplemented with 10% fetal bovine
serum (Atlanta Biologicals, Inc.) and 1% penicillin-streptomycin (Gibco, Inc.) at
37degC in an atmosphere of 5% CO2. After cells attained 80 to
90% confluence, they were harvested with 0.25% trypsin and split at a 1:3
ratio.
Generation of stable cell lines
Small hairpin RNA (shRNA) of the human B7-H3 (NM_001024736; GenBank) lentiviral gene
transfer vector encoding the green fluorescent protein (GFP) sequence was constructed by
Shanghai GeneChem Co. (Shanghai, China). The targeting sequence of B7-H3 was
5'-GAGCAGGGCTTGTTTGATGTG-3', and it was confirmed by sequencing. The
recombinant lentivirus of small hairpin interference RNA targeting B7-H3 (LV-B7-H3 virus)
and the nontargeted control mock lentivirus (LV-NC virus) were prepared and titered to
5x109 Tu/ml (transfection unit). Cells were subcultured at
5x104 cells/well into 6-well tissue culture plates overnight. The
viral supernatant was then added into cells at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 10
with ENi.S and 5 mg/ml Polybrene. GFP was evaluated by fluorescence microscopy to
estimate the infection efficiency. The infected Patu8988 cells were termed the LV-B7-H3
group and LV-NC group, respectively, and the Patu8988 cells without infection were the
control group. The 3 groups mentioned above were used in subsequent experiments. Real-time
reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) was carried out to confirm the
knockdown of B7-H3 mRNA, and B7-H3 protein expression was analyzed by FCM using a
Cytomics(tm) FC 500 device.
Real-time reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR)
RT-PCR was performed to confirm the knockdown of B7-H3 mRNA in the transfectants. Total
RNA was collected using TRIzol reagent following the manufacturer's instructions.
The concentration and purity of the total RNA were detected with an ultraviolet
spectrophotometer and then reversely transcribed into cDNA with MMLV. Quantitative
real-time PCR assays were carried out using SYBR-Green Real-time PCR Master Mix and
real-time PCR amplification equipment. GAPDH was used as an internal control. The PCR
conditions consisted of 1 cycle at 95degC for 15 sec followed by 45 cycles at
95degC for 5 sec and at 60degC for 30 sec. The primer sequences were as
follows: 5'-CTCTGCCTTCTCACCTCTTTG-3' (sense) and
5'-CCTTGAGGGAGGAACTTTATC-3' (antisense) for B7-H3 (134 bp);
5'-TGACTTCAACAGCGACACCCA-3' (sense) and
5'-CACCCTGTTGCTGTAGCCAAA-3' (antisense) for GAPDH (121 bp).
In another experiment of RT-PCR for B7-H3, products were electrophoresed on 1.8%
agarose gel containing 0.1% ethidium bromide. Images of the fluorescent bands were
captured by use of the Bio-Rad gel documentation system.
Cell proliferation by MTT assay
The MTT assay was used to study the effect of B7-H3 RNA interference on Patu8988 cell
proliferation. Cells of each group were plated at 10,000 cells/ well in a 96-well plate
for 24, 48 or 72 h. At each time point after discarding the medium, 100 ml
RPMI-1640 containing 20 ml MTT (Sigma) (5 mg/ml) was added to each well. After
incubation at 37degC for 4 h the MTT solution was removed. Dimethyl sulfoxide (100
ml) was added to each well and mixed to dissolve the dark blue formazan crystals
that formed. The proportion of viable cells was determined by reading the optical density
using test wave length (570 nm) and reference wave length (630 nm) with a
Multiskan(tm) MK3 ELISA reader. The assay was carried out in quintuplicate for each
group and repeated in triplicate.
In vitro wound scrape assay
Cells of each group were incubated in 6-well plates. A small wound area was made in the
confluent monolayer with a 200-ml pipette tip in a lengthwise stripe. Cells were
then washed twice with PBS and incubated in serum-free RPMI-1640 medium at 37degC in
a 5% CO2 incubator for 24 h (23,24).
Images were captured at different times from 0 to 48 h. Wound width was measured at a
x100 magnification using a BX50 microscope (Olympus) with a calibrated eyepiece
grid (1 mm/100 mm graduation). Ten measurements were determined at random
intervals along the wound length. This experiment was carried out in triplicate.
In vitro invasion assay
A co-culture system was used as an alternative method to evaluate cancer cell
invasiveness (25). Briefly, the
upper portion of Transwell inserts with an 8-mm pore size and a 6.5-mm diameter
was coated with 20 ml Matrigel diluted 1:3 in serum-free RPMI-1640 and incubated
at 37degC for 4 h. The coated inserts were placed in the well of a 24-well plate
with 600 ml RPMI-1640 containing 10% FBS in the bottom chamber. After 12 h
of serum starvation, the trypsinized cells were harvested and diluted to a
5x106/ml cell suspension with serum-free RPMI-1640. Each cell
suspension (100 ml) was added to the upper chambers. After incubation at
37degC for 48 h in a 5% CO2 atmosphere, the non-invading cells
and gel were removed from the upper chamber with cotton tipped swabs. The cells were
rinsed with PBS, and cells on the filters were fixed with methanol for 30 min and stained
with crystal violet solution (Sigma). The number of invading cells on the filters was
counted in 5 random fields/filter at x100 magnification in triplicate wells of
each group.
Subcutaneous transplantation model study
Three groups of 6 male Balb/c nude mice (5- to 6-weeks old and 20-24 g in weight)
were bred in an aseptic-specified pathogen-free (SPF) condition and kept at a constant
humidity and temperature (25-28degC). Animal experiments were carried out
according to protocols approved by the Animal Care and Use Committee and were in
compliance with the Guidelines on Animal Welfare of the China National Committee for
Animal Experiments. Cells (2x107) (LV-B7-H3, LV-NC or control cells) in
0.2 ml normal sodium were injected subcutaneously in the right inguinal region of nude
mice, respectively. The size of tumors was measured twice a week with calipers, and the
volume was determined using the simplified formula of a rotational ellipsoid (L x
W2 x 0.5). Growth curves were constructed, and the data are presented
as means +- SD. Tumors were harvested from mice 6 weeks after tumor cell injection.
B7-H3 expession was detected by immunohistochemistry of the tumor xenografts.
Immunohistochemistry
Clinical specimens and the tumor xenografts were used for immunohistochemical studies.
Specimens were fixed in formalin overnight and embedded in paraffin. Serial sections (4
mm) were prepared for immunohistological staining. Tissue sections were quenched
for endogenous peroxidase with freshly prepared 3% H2O2 with
0.1% sodium azide and then placed in an antigen retrieval solution for 15 min.
After incubation in a casein block, primary antibodies such as anti-B7-H3 (1:50 dilution)
were applied to the sections for 1 h at room temperature, followed by incubation with the
secondary antibody and Extravidinconjugated horseradish peroxidase. The immune reaction
was counterstained with hematoxylin, dehydrated, and mounted. Sections were then evaluated
for the presence of brown diaminobenzidine precipitates indicative of positive reactivity
by microscopy. The brown staining in the cytoplasm was read as positive reactivity for
B7-H3.
Orthotopic transplantation pancreatic cancer model study
The establishment of an inguinal region subcutaneous transplantation tumor model of 3
groups (LV-B7-H3, LV-NC and control cells) was carried out respectively, as described
above. After growing to a specific certain volume, the tumors were resected under aseptic
environment and washed twice in antibiotic-containing RPMI-1640 to prevent possible
infection. Necrotic tissues were removed, and the remaining viable tumor tissues were cut
into small pieces of 1 mm3. Five-week-old BALB/c-nu mice, weighing
20-24 g, were anesthetized with urethane (4 ml/kg) by intramuscular injection.
After the abdominal skin was sterilized, an incision was made in the upper left abdomen,
and the pancreas was exposed. Tumor pieces were attached to the pancreas using absorbable
sutures. The pancreas was then returned to the peritoneum, and the abdominal wall and the
skin were closed with silk sutures. The animals were allowed to recover for 24 h. Three
groups of 6 surviving mice were bred in an aseptic-specified pathogens-free (SPF)
condition and kept at a constant humidity and temperature (25-28degC). All
of the mice were sacrificed 7 weeks after the orthotopic transplantation operation.
Metastatic visceral tumors out of the pancreas, such as metastatic tumors in liver, on the
small intestine serous membrane surface or on the peritoneum, were excised carefully and
weighed as described previously (26).
Statistical analysis
B7-H3 expression in pancreatic cancer and normal pancreas tissues as determined by
immunohistochemical staining was compared and assessed using the Chi-square test. Other
data are shown as means +- SD. Statistical comparisons were performed using the
Student's t-test. All P-values were determined by 2-sided tests with significance
considered at <0.05. These analyses were performed using SPSS 13.0 software.

Results
Tissue samples and immunohistochemical staining
B7-H3 levels in the pancreatic cancer group were significantly higher than that in the
normal pancreas group (mean 193.6+-9.352 vs. 87.74+-7.433 ng/g,
P<0.0001) (Fig. 1).
Immunohistochemical staining revealed significantly overexpressed B7-H3 in tumor tissue
(Chi-square test 15.341; P<0.001). Positive staining for B7-H3 expression was
detected in more than 50% of cells in 17 of the 26 pancreatic cancer specimens
while no positive cells were detected in normal pancreas specimens (Fig. 2).
B7-H3 downregulation by RNA interference in Patu8988 cells
After infection with the lentiviral vector, Patu8988 cells were examined by fluorescence
microscopy (Fig. 3). The result
showed high efficiency of the lentiviral infection. To determine the efficiency of RNA
interference, we analyzed the levels of B7-H3 mRNA and protein expression in the 3 groups.
Fig. 4A and B shows B7-H3 mRNA
expression in the 3 groups. B7-H3 mRNA expression was obviously decreased in the LV-B7-H3
group compared with the LV-NC or the control groups (mean 8.4+-2.15%,
P<0.01) (Fig. 4B). The
inhibition rate was 91.6%. However, there was no significant difference between
the LV-NC group and the control group (P>0.05). A similar decrease was found in
protein synthesis by FCM assay (mean 20.6+-5.9%, P<0.01) (Fig. 4C). The mean inhibition rate was
79.4% vs. the control group. These findings indicate that the downregulation of
the B7-H3 gene, by RNA interference was specific and efficient.
Proliferation in vitro by MTT assay
To characterize the role of B7-H3 in Patu8988 cell growth, we measured the cell
proliferation rate in vitro by MTT assay. There was no statistical
significance in cellular proliferation between the control and the experimental groups
(P>0.05) (Fig. 5).
Migration on wound scrape assay in vitro
To determine whether B7-H3 acts as a cell migration regulator, we used the wound scrape
assay to evaluate cell motility. RNA interference resulting in inhibition of B7-H3
significantly decreased Patu8988 cell migration in the wound scrape model (Fig. 6). Time course analysis of the
wound closure showed that a monolayer was re-established within a significantly shorter
period in the LV-NC and control groups than that in the LV-B7-H3 group.
Invasive ability in the Transwell assay in vitro
After down-regulation of the expression of B7-H3 by RNA interference, an in
vitro assay on Matrigel filters revealing that the number of invading Patu8988
cells was decreased up to 50% (P<0.05, LV-B7-H3 group vs. the control
group) (Fig. 7). There was no
statistical significance in the number of invading cells between the LV-NC and the control
group (P>0.05).
Tumor growth in the subcutaneous transplantation mouse model
The in vitro experiments with the Patu8988 cells showed the effects of
B7-H3 on tumor progression. Hence, we examined whether this could be observed in
vivo. LV-B7-H3, LV-NC and control cells were injected subcutaneously into nude
mice. All of the 18 mice developed detectable tumors at the beginning of this experiment.
The growth rate was reduced by the knockdown of B7-H3 (Fig. 8). Inhibition of tumor growth was observed in the LV-B7-H3
group at 6 weeks, when compared to the LV-NC group (211+-47 mm3) or the
control group (235+-57 mm3). The average tumor volume (22+-5
mm3) in the LV-B7-H3 group was significantly lower than that in the LV-NC and
control groups (P<0.01). There was no statistical significance in tumor volume
between the LV-NC and the control group (P>0.05).
The knockdown of B7-H3 in the xenografts was confirmed by immunohistochemical staining.
While the level of B7-H3 expression retaimed low in the LV-B7-H3 group tumors, the LV-NC
and control tumors showed strong staining (Fig. 9).
Metastatic tumors in the orthotopic transplantation pancreatic cancer mouse
model
All of the 18 mice were sacrificed 7 weeks after the transplantation operation. All of
the mice developed orthotopic transplantation pancreatic cancer tumors in this experiment.
Abdominal visceral metastatic tumors were detected, excised and weighed (Fig. 10). The number of cases of liver
metastasis in the LV-B7-H3 group (1/6, 16.67%) was less than the number of cases
in the LV-NC group (4/6, 66.67%) or the control group (5/6, 83.33%). The
effect of inhibiting metastasis by knockdown of B7-H3 was assessed in terms of the average
postmortem abdominal visceral metastatic tumor weight. Inhibition of metastasis was
observed in the LV-B7-H3 group, when compared to the LV-NC group (1.28+-0.41 g) or
the control group (1.33+-0.38 g). The average weight of the abdominal visceral
metastatic tumors (0.26+-0.13 g) in the LV-B7-H3 group was significantly lower than
that in LV-NC and control groups (Fig.
10B) (P<0.01). There was no statistical significance in metastatic
visceral tumor weight between the LV-NC and the control group (P>0.05). These
indicated that inhibition of B7-H3 expression reduced pancreatic cancer metastasis
in vivo. It strongly supports the effects observed in
vitro indicating that B7-H3 plays a vital role in invasion and migration of
pancreatic cancer cells.

Discussion
In recent years increasing evidence indicates that B7-H3 plays an important role in tumor
progression and metastasis. Wu et al(27) reported that B7-H3 expression is related to survival time and
tumor infiltration depth in gastric cancer cases. Zhang et al(28) found that circulating B7-H3 in serum
is a highly sensitive biomarker for non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and increased
circulating B7-H3 suggests a poor clinical prognosis for NSCLC patients. Sun et
al(29) reported that
higher B7-H3 expression in colorectal cancer was positively correlated with a more advanced
tumor grade, and the level of soluble B7-H3 in serum from colorectal cancer patients was
higher than healthy donors. This suggests that both soluble and membranous B7-H3 proteins
are involved in colorectal cancer progression. Yamato et al(12) found that B7-H3 expression was
significantly more intense in cases with lymph node metastasis and advanced pathological
stage in pancreatic cancer. B7-H3 blockade induced a substantial antitumor effect on murine
pancreatic cancer. B7-H3 overexpression was also reported to correlate with tumor
aggressiveness and poor clinical outcome, suggesting that B7-H3 has a critical role in tumor
progression.
Since we realized the limitation of using immunohistochemical methods for semi-quantitative
analysis (30), we also used ELISA.
Our results showed aberrant B7-H3 expression in pancreatic cancer, in accord with the
findings of Yamato et al(12). However, to ascertain why B7-H3 overexpression correlates with pathological
indicators of aggressive cancer and clinical outcome and its role in tumor progression, we
further investigated the effects of low B7-H3 expression on the biological features of human
pancreatic cancer Patu8988 cells.
Carcinogenesis is a multiple step process in which cancer cells lose proliferation control,
disseminate from a localized primary tumor mass to invading adnexa and metastasize to
distant organs. Limitless cell growth is an important alteration in cancer cell phenotype
(31). We first determined the
effects of B7-H3 depletion on Patu8988 cell growth. The proliferation of B7-H3-knockdown
cells was the same as that of controls and there was no obvious difference. To further
investigate whether B7-H3 contributes to tumor metastasis, we performed a wound scrape assay
to evaluate cell motility and a Transwell invasion assay to assess cell invasiveness
in vitro to determine the mechanisms of cell metastasis toward distant
tissue. The results indicated that B7-H3 has a putatively important role in tumor migration
and invasiveness, indicating higher aggressiveness and poor clinical outcome.
The results in vitro were confirmed in our studies in
vivo. In the subcutaneous transplantation model, the growth rate of established
B7-H3-knockdown xenografts was slower than that of the LV-NC and the control groups.
Although the MTT assay in vitro showed that the proliferation rate was not
decreased by B7-H3 knockdown, the growth rate of B7-H3-knockdown tumors in the subcutaneous
transplantation model showed a significant decrease. Nevertheless, the tumor cell growth
microenvironment in vivo is quite more complicated than that in
vitro. The underlying molecular mechanisms of this phenomenon still require
further research. Immunohistochemical analysis of the xenograft tissue confirmed that the
tumors originating from LV-B7-H3 cells retained low expression levels of the B7-H3 protein,
whereas the LV-NC group and the control group tumors showed strong B7-H3 staining.
Furthermore, in the orthotopic transplantation pancreatic cancer model, we found that
decreased B7-H3 expression reduced tumor metastasis. Compared to the control group, there
was a dramatic reduction in the weight of the abdominal visceral metastatic tumors in the
LV-B7-H3 group. The underlying reasons may at least partly be that B7-H3 knockdown inhibits
pancreatic cancer migratory and invasive ability.
In summary, our study investigating the role of B7-H3 in pancreatic cancer progression
shows that this protein promotes cancer cell migration and invasiveness in
vitro and in vivo. Furthermore, in contrast to previous reports
focusing on the immunoregulatory effects of B7-H3, which are involved in evasion of cancer
immune surveillance, our data show that it plays a critical role in pancreatic cancer
progression through cell migration and invasiveness via non-immunomechanisms. These findings
provide new insight into the role of B7-H3 in pancreatic cancer and may have important
implications in the development of targeted therapeutics for this disease. However, whether
B7-H3 regulates cancer progression directly or through various important intracellular
pathways, still requires investigation, and we will engage in this field further.
In conclusion, B7-H3 is aberrantly expressed in pancreatic cancer. Our study indicates that
B7-H3 may regulate tumor progression by promoting cell migration and invasiveness, in
addition to acting as an immunoregulatory protein. B7-H3 may serve as a potential molecular
target for pancreatic cancer therapy. Although preliminary data are significant, a precise
mechanism of B7-H3 expression regulation in the tumor environment, overall knowledge of its
clinical implications and targeted therapeutic interventions in pancreatic cancer require
further investigation.
