[Abstract, Introduction, Methods, Results, Discussion, Mixed]

Overexpression of YAP and TAZ Is an Independent Predictor of Prognosis in Colorectal Cancer and Related to the Proliferation and Metastasis of Colon Cancer Cells. Background and Objective Yes-associated protein (YAP) and transcriptional co-activator with PDZ-binding motif (TAZ) are nuclear effectors of the Hippo pathway. Although they are abundantly expressed in the cytoplasm and nuclei of human colorectal cancer (CRC), and related to tumor proliferation status, there have been few studies on the predictive role of YAP and TAZ expression on the overall survival of patients with CRC. This study investigated YAP and TAZ expression in both CRC patients and colon cancer cell lines, and assessed their prognostic value.   Methods Paraffin-embedded specimens from 168 eligible patients were used to investigate YAP and TAZ expression by immunohistochemistry, and compared with experimental results in colon cancer HCT116 cell line to explore their clinical significance in CRC.   Results Statistically significant positive correlations were found between protein expression of YAP and TAZ in CRC tissues. Patients with higher YAP or TAZ expression showed a trend of shorter survival times; more importantly, our cohort study indicated that patients with both YAP and TAZ overexpression presented the worst outcomes. This was supported by multivariate analysis. In HCT116 colon cancer cells, the capacity for proliferation, metastasis, and invasion was dramatically reduced by knockdown of YAP and TAZ expressions by siRNA.   Conclusions Co-overexpression of YAP and TAZ is an independent predictor of prognosis for patients with CRC, and may account for the higher proliferation, metastasis, and poor survival outcome of these patients.

Introduction
The Hippo pathway is an important regulator of cell growth, proliferation, and apoptosis. It was first discovered by genetic mosaic screens in Drosophila melanogaster
[1], [2]; however, there is an increasing body of evidence demonstrating that the Hippo pathway also limits organ size in mammalian systems [3], [4] by inhibiting cell proliferation and promoting apoptosis. Components of this pathway are highly conserved in mammals, and include Mst1/2; WW45; Lats1/2; Mob1; YAP; TAZ; NF; FRMD6; and Fat4 [2]. Mst1/2 and Last1/2 are kinases, and WW45 and Mob1 act as adaptors/activators in mammals, together these make up the core kinase cassette of the Hippo pathway. The Yki homologs: Yes-associated protein (YAP) and its paralog, transcriptional co-activator with PDZ-binding motif (TAZ), are the principle targets of the core Hippo kinase cascade, and are considered to be the nuclear effectors of Hippo pathway [5].
Previous studies have reported that aberrant alteration of the key components of the Hippo pathway leads to uncontrolled cell growth, and is associated with cancer development [6], [7]. This implies that the Hippo pathway plays a critical role in suppressing tumor growth [8]. Aberrant activation of YAP has been associated with poor prognosis in multiple of human cancers [5], [9]-[11], including hepatocellular, ovarian, and malignant mesothelioma, and may act as an oncogene in breast cancer [15]. As such, YAP has been proposed as a candidate oncogene. Furthermore, overexpression of YAP was found to enhance liver size and eventually lead to tumor development in conditional transgenic mice models [5], [12], [13]. Additional studies have shown that TAZ, and TAZ-dependent secretion of amphiregulin (AREG), also plays a significant role in breast tumorigenesis and metastasis: when overexpressed TAZ is knocked down in non-small-cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC), its proliferation and oncogenic properties are suppressed [16].
Although both YAP and TAZ have been shown to be involved in the progression of cancers originating from various tissues, it is necessary to investigate the tissue-specific role of YAP and TAZ expression in order to investigate the role of YAP and TAZ in human colorectal cancer (CRC) and further understand the function of Hippo pathway. Recently published data suggests that overexpressed YAP may interplay with b-catenin to drive proliferation of colon cancer cells, implying that YAP could play a role in cancer therapy [17]; however, to our knowledge, research into the clinical significance of YAP and TAZ, and the prognostic value of YAP and TAZ, has been limited, and the significance of YAP and TAZ co-overexpression in CRC, remains elusive.
In this study, we investigated the prognostic value of both YAP and TAZ in a retrospective cohort study with a five years follow-up, to determine the independent predictive role of YAP and TAZ in patients with CRC. We identified a synergy between these two proteins and a potential mechanism by which the Hippo pathway modulates human CRC progression.

Materials and Methods
Patients and Follow-up
This study was approved by the Ethics Committee of the Fourth Military Medical University (FMMU; Xi'an, China), and all participating patients gave their written informed consent. The retrospective cohort included 168 patients diagnosed with potentially resectable CRC between February 2006 and December 2007 at the Department of Gastrointestinal surgery of Xijing Hospital, FMMU. Patients with the following criteria were excluded from participation: had received adjuvant chemotherapy prior to surgery; had been diagnosed with gastrointestinal stromal tumor or lymphoma; had additional cancers diagnoses; or refused consent. All the clinical specimens were retrieved from the tissue archive of Department of Pathology, Xijing Hospital, FMMU. Follow-up information was updated every three months, from all participants, by telephone. Overall survival was defined as the time elapsed from surgery to the time of patient death. Patient death was established from their family.
Immunohistochemistry and Scoring
Paraffin-embedded sections of normal and tumor tissues were stained for YAP (H-125: sc-15407; Santa Cruz Biotechnology, USA) and TAZ (NP_056287: ab118373; Abcam, UK) expression. As the antibody against YAP used in this study is a polyclonal antibody, we used Western blotting to identify the antibody specificity of YAP (Figure S1). Immunohistochemistry (IHC) for YAP and TAZ were performed as previously described [7] with minor modifications. Briefly, slides were deparaffinized in xylene, and rehydrated through a graded alcohol series, before endogenous peroxidase activity was blocked with 3% H2O2 in methanol. After blocking against nonspecific protein binding, samples were incubated overnight with YAP or TAZ primary antibodies, diluted to the recommended concentrations (1:500), in a humidity chamber at 4degC. Samples were washed three times with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), before biotinylated secondary antibody was applied for 30 min at room temperature. Visualization was performed using 3,3' Diaminobenzidine (DAB) chromogen for 2-3 min. Negative controls were prepared by replacing the primary antibody with preimmune rabbit serum. YAP and TAZ staining were scored by two independent pathologists, blinded to the clinical characteristics of the patients. The scoring system used to grade the expression of YAP and TAZ is described in Table 1.
Cell Culture
The following human colon cancer cell lines: HCT116, LS174T, LOVO, SW480, and SW480 were used in this study. All the cell lines were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC). HCT116 and LOVO cells were cultured in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (DMEM; Invitrogen, CA, USA) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS; HyClone); SW480 and LS174T cells were cultured in RPMI1640 (Invitrogen, CA, USA) medium supplemented with 10% FBS; SW620 cells were cultured in Leibovitz's L-15 (Invitrogen, CA, USA) medium with 10% FBS. All the cells were cultured at 37degC in a humidified atmosphere of 5% CO2.
Transfection and Gene Silencing
For small interfering RNA (siRNA) transfection, the following siRNA duplexes were synthesized (Genepharma, Shanghai, China): (5'-GGUGAUACUAUCAACCAAATT-3'), targeting the YAP gene; (5'-GGAUACAGGAGAAAACGCATT-3'), targeting the TAZ gene; and the negative control duplex, (5'-CCUACGCCACCAAUUUCGU-3'). These siRNA duplexes (100 nmol/L) were transfected into HCT116 cells using Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer's instructions. HCT116 cells were harvested 48 h post-transfection for gene or protein analysis.
Quantitative Real-time Reverse-transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction
Total RNA was extracted from cell lines using TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen), and subsequent synthesis of cyclic DNA (cDNA; TaKaRa, Japan), were carried out according to the manufacturers' protocols. Real-time quantitative reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) was performed using the CFX96TM Real-Time PCR system (BioRad, CA, USA) with the SYBR Green II kit (#DRR041A; TaKaRa, Japan) according to the manufacturers' instructions. QRT-PCR analysis was carried out in a total volume of 20 ul with the following amplification steps: an initial denaturation step at 95degC for 10 min; followed by 40 cycles of denaturation at 95degC for 15 s; and then elongation at 55degC for 30 s. The expressions were normalized to the human b-actin gene. The following primer sequences were used: 5'-ACCCACAGCTCAGCATCTTCG-3' (sense) and 5'-TGGCTTGTTCCCATCCATCAG-3' (antisense) for YAP; 5'-GTCACCAACAGTAGCTCAGATC-3' (sense) and 5'-AGTGATTACAGCCAGGTTAGAAAG-3' (antisense) for TAZ; 5'-CGTCTTCCCCTCCATCGT-3' (sense) and 5'-GAAGGTGTGGTGCCAGATTT-3' (antisense) for b-actin.
Western Blot Analysis
Cells were harvested in radioimmunoprecipitation assay buffer (Santa Cruz Biotechnology). Proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE, and transferred onto nitrocellulose membranes (Millipore, MA, USA). The membranes were blocked with 5% nonfat milk in PBS buffer for 2 h at room temperature, before being targeted ith the following antibodies according the manufacturers' instructions: anti-Yap (1:500); anti-TAZ (1:500); and anti-actin (1:5,000; AC40: A4700; Sigma-Aldrich, USA). Membranes were incubated with their associated horseradish peroxidase-conjugated (HPC) secondary antibodies, and the antibody-bound proteins were visualized by chemiluminescence (New England Nuclear, MA, USA).
Cell Growth Assay (MTT)
Cell proliferation in vitro was analyzed using tetrazolium salt 3-(4, 5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2, 5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT); because yellow MTT dye is reduced to a blue formazan product by respiratory enzymes that are only active in viable cells, the degree of color change is indicative of cell proliferation. HCT116 cells were transfected for 48h with no siRNA (parental); specific siRNAs (si-Con, si-YAP, or si-TAZ); or co-transfected with si-YAP and si-TAZ (si-YAP-TAZ), and suspended in DMEM with 10% FBS. Briefly, 2000 cells of each clone (parental, si-Con, si-YAP, si-TAZ, and si-YAP-TAZ) were plated in five 96-well plates in 200 ul of DMEM medium. For analysis: 20 ul of MTT substrate (from a 2.5 mg/ml stock solution in PBS) was added to each well; the plates were returned to the incubator for an additional 4 h at 37degC in a humidified atmosphere of 5% CO2; the medium was removed; the cells were solubilized in 150 ul dimethylsulfoxide; and colorimetric analysis was performed (wavelength, 490 nm). One plate was analyzed immediately after the cells adhered (approximately 4 h after plating), and the remaining plates were assayed over the next four consecutive days.
Flow Cytometric Analysis of Apoptotic Cells
HCT116 cells were transfected for 48 h with no siRNA (parental); specific siRNA (si-Con, si-YAP, or si-TAZ ); or co-transfected with si-YAP and si-TAZ (si-YAP-TAZ), before being suspended in PBS at a density of 1 x 106 cells/ml. Apoptotic cells were analyzed by flow cytometry using a CYTOMICS FC 500 flow cytometer (Beckman Coulter), after incubating the cells with a reagent containing Annexin V-FITC and Propidium Iodide (BD Bioscience, CA, USA) for 15 min in darkness at room temperature.
Analysis of Invasiveness and Mobility (Migration and Invasion Assays)
Cell invasion and migration potentials were measured in vitro by Transwell assays (Millipore, Billerica, MA) as follows: HCT116 cells were transfected for 48 h with no siRNA (parental); specific siRNA (si-Con, si-YAP, or si-TAZ ); or co-transfected with si-YAP and si-TAZ (si-YAP-TAZ); the cells were suspended in DMEM with 10 g/l BSA at a density of 50 cells/ul; 200 ul cell suspensions were seeded into the upper chambers of the Transwells, in which the porous membrane was either coated with Matrigel (BD Bioscience) for the invasion assays, or left uncoated for the migration assays. DMEM with 10% serum (500 ul) was added to the bottom chamber as a chemoattractant. After migration for 24 h, or invasion for 48 h, the cells that had penetrated the filters were fixed in methanol, and stained in 4g/l crystal violet. The numbers of migrated and invasive cells were determined from five random fields under an Olympus microscope (Olympus) at x10 magnification.
Statistical Analysis
Statistical analysis was undertaken using IBM SPSS Statistical software (version 20.0). Spearman's rank test was used to assess the correlation between YAP and TAZ expressions; survival curves were estimated using the Kalplan-Meier method; and distributions were evaluated by the long-rank test. Cox's proportional hazards modeling of factors potentially related to survival were conducted to calculate hazard ratios (HR), and identify which factors might have a significant influence on survival. Differences in characteristics between the two groups were examined by the Pearson's chi-square (kh2) test and Fisher's exact test. All P values were determined from 2-tailed tests and differences with a P-value <0.05 were considered to be statistically significant.

Results
Clinical Significance of YAP and TAZ Overexpression in Colorectal Cancer Tissue
To determine the prevalence and clinical significance of YAP and TAZ in CRC, we assessed the expression of YAP and TAZ protein by IHC in tumor tissue samples from our retrospective cohort of 168 from CRC patients after tumor resection. Among the 168 patients, 122 (72.6%) were positive for YAP expression, either nuclear or cytoplasmic (Figure 1A); whereas 46 (27.4%) were negative for YAP expression (Figure 1B); 97 (57.8%) samples were positive for TAZ expression; and 71 (42.2%) were negative for TAZ expression (Figures 1E and F, respectively). In contrast, only 3 (18.75%) and 2 (12.5%) out of the 16 adjacent normal tissue samples were found positive for YAP and TAZ expression, respectively (Figures 1C, D, G, and H). In addition, there was a significant positive correlation between YAP and TAZ (r = 0.630, P<0.001; Table S1), indicating a potential correlation between these proteins in CRC.
10.1371/journal.pone.0065539.g001
Figure 1
Immunohistochemically stained tissues from CRC patients and adjacent normal control tissues.
(A) YAP-positive tumor; (B) YAP-negative tumor; (C) YAP-positive normal tissue; (D) YAP-negative normal tissue; (E) TAZ-positive tumor; (F) TAZ-negative tumor; (G) TAZ-positive normal tissue; (H) TAZ-negative normal tissue. Representative images were taken under a microscope (x10). These results indicate the clinical significance of YAP and TAZ overexpression in CRC tissue.
As a result of these observations, we evaluated the relationship between YAP and TAZ expression and the clinical features of CRC patients by Pearson's chi-square test or Fisher's exact test. Our results showed that expression of YAP and TAZ were significantly associated with the lymph node status in colorectal tumors (P = 0.001 and P = 0.013, respectively), but were not significantly correlated to gender, tumor location, tumor size, cell differentiation, or TNM stage (Table 2). The high prognostic impact of lymph node metastases, and the total number of lymph nodes to be resected, is well established. A recent study demonstrated that the cut-off values of lymph node ratio (the ratio of tumor-infiltrated nodes to resected lymph nodes) are strong independent prognostic factors for CRC patients, based on the analyses of clinical and histopathological data from 3026 patients at a single surgical center over a 25-year period [18]. These findings led us to investigate the role of YAP and TAZ in the prognosis of CRC patients.
YAP and TAZ Co-overexpression were Associated with Poor Overall Survival
To determine the prognostic significance of YAP and TAZ expression in CRC patients, we attempted to relate YAP and TAZ expression to the clinical outcomes. The overall median survival time among the patients in our retrospective cohort was 43 months (range: 1-56 months), and at the end of the follow-up period (60 months), 70 of the 168 patients were alive, and 98 patients were dead. The association between YAP and TAZ protein expression and overall survival of CRC patients was investigated using Kaplan-Meier analysis and log-rank test for significance estimates. Patients were divided into two groups: those with positive expression of YAP or TAZ, and those with negative expression of YAP or TAZ. A statistically significant difference was found between the overall survival of the two groups (long-rank test: P<0.02 and P<0.001, respectively). Patients with higher expressions of YAP or TAZ tended to have a higher risk of death compared to patients with lower expressions of YAP or TAZ, with the unadjusted HR being 1.617 and 1.643, respectively. In addition, cell differentiation, lymph node metastasis, and TNM stage were found to be associated with prognosis for CRC patients (Table 3). Multivariate analysis showed that higher expression of YAP or TAZ was associated with a reduction of overall survival, with the adjusted HR being 2.168 (95% CI: 1.125-4.179; P<0.001) and 1.544 (95% CI: 0.999-2.451; P = 0.05), respectively, indicating that the expression of YAP or TAZ could be a prognostic factor independent of these adjusted clinicopathologic characteristics (Table 3).
We next investigated whether co-overexpression of YAP and TAZ could have a prognostic role in CRC. Our cohort patients were divided into four groups according to their combined expression levels of YAP and TAZ. A statistically significant difference was observed in overall survival outcome between these four subgroups of patients; those with positive co-overexpression of YAP and TAZ had the worst overall survival (Figure 2). Cox's proportional hazards model, adjusted for gender, age, tumor size, tumor location, differentiation status, and TNM stage, compared with YAP or TAZ expression, showed that negative expression of both YAP and TAZ were associated with significantly improved overall survival; whereas, expression of both YAP and TAZ were associated with significantly poor overall survival (Table 3), with the adjusted HR being 3.118 (95% CI: 1.017-9.559; P<0.001). These data demonstrated that YAP and TAZ co-overexpression may have a specific and independent prognostic impact among CRC patients.
10.1371/journal.pone.0065539.g002
Figure 2
Kaplan-Meier analysis of overall survival (cumulative survival) of CRC patients relative to YAP and TAZ expression.
(A) Correlation of YAP expression with overall survival; (B) correlation of TAZ expression with overall survival; (C) correlation of combined YAP and TAZ expression with overall survival. A statistically significant difference is shown in overall survival outcome between the different groups of patients, with those having positive co-overexpression of YAP and TAZ having the worst overall survival.
Overexpression of YAP and TAZ in HCT116 Colon Cancer Cell Line
In order to further investigate the effect of YAP and TAZ on the progression of CRC, we tested our preliminary cohort study conclusions in cell line experiments. We first examined the gene and protein expression levels of YAP and TAZ in HCT116, LS174T, LOVO, SW620, and SW480 colon cancer cell lines. HCT116 cells showed the highest expression levels of both YAP and TAZ (Figures 3A and B); therefore, the HCT116 cell line was chosen for subsequent experiments to investigate YAP and TAZ in CRC progression.
10.1371/journal.pone.0065539.g003
Figure 3
Assessment of YAP and TAZ expression in six human colon adenocarcinoma cell lines.
(A) QRT-PCR analysis of YAP and TAZ expressions; (B) Western blot analysis of YAP and TAZ expressions. b-actin is used as an internal loading control. HCT116 cells show the highest expression levels of both YAP and TAZ.
Effect of YAP or TAZ siRNA on YAP or TAZ Levels in Human HCT116 Colon Cancer Cell Lines
We next examined the effect of YAP and TAZ in the HCT116 cell line through knockdown of YAP or TAZ expression using targeted siRNAs. The specificity of siRNA targeting for YAP and TAZ was confirmed by Western blot analysis. Compared to cells that had been transfected with control siRNA, the expression of YAP and TAZ was strongly suppressed in HCT116 cells transfected with 10 ug of targeted siRNAs (Figure 4A and Figure S2).
10.1371/journal.pone.0065539.g004
Figure 4
Effect of YAP and TAZ expression on proliferation and apoptosis of HCT116 cells.
(A) Western blot analysis of cell lines with reduced YAP and TAZ levels after transfection with siRNAs: parental HCT116 cells carrying no siRNA (parental); control siRNA (si-Con); siRNA to YAP (si-YAP); siRNA to TAZ (si-TAZ); and co-transfected with siRNA to YAP and siRNA to TAZ (si-YAP-TAZ). (B) MTT cell growth assays of control cells (parental, si-Con); cells with reduced YAP or TAZ expression (si-YAP, si-TAZ); or cells with reduced YAP and TAZ expression (si-YAP-TAZ). Data are presented as mean +- SD, N = 3, *P<0.05. (C) Flow cytometric analyses of cells stained with Annexin-V-FITC and PI: cells carrying no siRNA (parental); control siRNA (si-Con); siRNA to YAP (si-YAP); siRNA to TAZ (si-TAZ); and cells with reduced YAP and TAZ expression (si-YAP-TAZ). These results indicate that YAP expression has a greater effect on cell proliferation and suppression of apoptosis compared to TAZ expression; however, a synergistic role between YAP and TAZ increases their combined individual effects.
Effect of YAP and TAZ Expression on Cell Proliferation
MTT assays were used to determine the effects of reduced YAP and TAZ expression on HCT116 colon cancer cell growth rates. The group transfected with YAP siRNA showed a significant reduction in proliferation rate relative to the group transfected with parental or control siRNAs. A similar trend was observed with TAZ siRNA; however, the effect was not as strong. The group that was co-transfected with YAP and TAZ siRNAs showed the most dramatic, and highly significant (P<0.05), decrease in proliferation rate compared to the parental or control siRNA groups (Figure 4B); therefore, these results demonstrated that YAP and TAZ possessed a synergistic role of on the proliferation of colon cancer cells.
Effect of YAP and TAZ Expression on HCT116 Cells Apoptosis Ratio
We then investigated the difference in apoptosis ratio between the YAP and/or TAZ knockdown groups and the control group to confirm our retrospective cohort study results. Flow cytometry analysis showed that the apoptosis ratio was decreased in HCT116 cells transfected with YAP siRNA compared to HCT116 cells transfected with parental or si-Con siRNA (17.48% vs. 1.62%, P<0.05; 17.48% vs. 2.28%, P<0.05, respectively; Figure 4C); the effect was slightly weaker in HCT116 cells transfected with TAZ siRNA relative to those transfected with parental or si-Con siRNA (6.48% vs.1.62%, P<0.05; 6.48% vs. 2.28%, P<0.05, respectively; Figure 4C); however, the apoptosis ratio was most dramatically decreased in HCT116 cells co-transfected with YAP and TAZ siRNAs compared to those transfected with parental and si-Con (33.60% vs. 1.62%, P<0.01; 33.60% vs. 2.28%, P<0.05, respectively; Figure 4C). Collectively, these results indicated that YAP expression had a major role in promoting cell proliferation and suppressing cell apoptosis; TAZ played an important, though less significant role, in this progress; and a synergistic effect between YAP and TAZ increased their impact on cell proliferation and apoptosis further.
Effect of YAP and TAZ on Migration and Invasion
YAP and TAZ activity has previously been shown to mediate tumor cell migration and invasion. Our observation that a reduction of YAP and TAZ expression played a synergistic role in the inhibition of cell proliferation and increase in apoptosis of HCT116 cells led us to assess the effect of YAP and TAZ siRNA co-transfection on the migration and invasion capabilities of colon cancer cells. Standard, and Matrigel-coated transwell assays were used to assess migration and invasion, respectively. Both YAP and TAZ siRNA transfected cells displayed statistically significantly reduced migration compared to control cells; the reduction was more significant in the group transfected with TAZ siRNA; however, the group transfected with both YAP and TAZ showed the most significant effect on the reduction of migration (Figures 5A and B). The trends were similar in the Matrigel invasion assays: clones with reduced YAP or TAZ levels showed a statistically significant reduction of invasiveness compared to control cells; the effect was more significant in the TAZ knockdown group; however, the most significant reduction of invasiveness was observed when both YAP and TAZ were knocked down (Figure 5C and D).
10.1371/journal.pone.0065539.g005
Figure 5
Effect of YAP and TAZ expression on the migration and invasion of HCT116 colon cancer cells.
(A) Representative images (x10) of migration assays of HCT116 cells with normal levels of YAP and TAZ expression (parental and si-Con); cells with suppressed levels of YAP or TAZ expression (si-YAP or si-TAZ); and cells with suppressed YAP and TAZ expression (si-YAP-TAZ). (B) Mean number of cells from the five independent migration assays described in previously. (C) Invasion assay of parental HCT116 cells; si-Con cells; si-YAP; si-TAZ; and si-YAP-TAZ cells in modified Boyden chambers with Matrigel-coated membranes. After 24 h, invasive cells that had moved through the Matrigel membrane were stained and counted under a microscope at x10 magnification. (D) Graphical representation of invasive cells calculated as mean value +- SD from five fields. These show statistically significantly reduced migration in both YAP and TAZ siRNA transfected cells compared to control cells; the effect is greatest in the group transfected with both YAP and TAZ. [Asterisks indicate statistically significant differences in YAP or TAZ siRNA transfected cells vs. si-Con or parental cells, (*, P<0.05; **, P<0.01).].

Discussion
YAP and TAZ are major downstream targets of the Hippo signaling pathway. To date, there has been a considerable body of evidence that links the YAP/TAZ oncogene to tumorigenicity in several solid types of cancers, including ovary, breast, prostate, liver, and lung [7], [9], [12], [15]. Overexpression of YAP has been reported to aberrantly activate an array of target genes responsible for cell proliferation, survival, anti-apoptosis, and migration [19], [20]. Furthermore, previous studies have identified YAP as an independent prognostic marker for overall survival and disease-free times of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) patients; and clinicopathologically associated with tumor differentiation [21]. Based on the established views that YAP may increase organ size, and function as an oncogene [5], [9]; and that TAZ may promote cell proliferation, induce epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), and increase cell migration and invasion [22]; combined with the potential similarity of tissue-specific functions of YAP and TAZ, we examined and characterized the clinical significance of YAP and TAZ as an independent prognostic factor for determining the outcomes of CRC patients. Our results were consistent with a previous study [7], in that the expression levels of both YAP and TAZ were significantly elevated in the majority of CRC tissues compared to adjacent normal tissues; however, in contrast to reports on breast cancer and lung squamous cell carcinoma, we found no discrepancy between cytoplasmic and nuclear expression of YAP or TAZ in CRC tissues [15]. Variations in the expression of YAP between different cancer tissues are probably due to their complicated tumor microenvironment. Using multivariate Cox regression analyses, we found that high co-expression of YAP and TAZ was a prognostic predictor for overall survival of CRC patients, independent of gender, age, tumor size, differentiation status, vascular invasion, and TNM stage. Furthermore, the lowest overall survival rates were identified in patients who co-expressed YAP and TAZ, and were associated with tumors having the greatest capacities of migration and invasion.
YAP is acknowledged as a candidate oncogene, and became the focus of research, after it was identified in human chromosome 11q22 amplicon which is evident in several human cancers [14]. TAZ is a YAP paralog, initially identified as a 14-3-3 binding protein [23]; TAZ has approximately 50% sequence identity with YAP, and a similar topology; TAZ acts as a transcriptional co-activator in similar manner to YAP [23]; of note, was the discovery that YAP and TAZ share the downstream transcription factor, TEAD, to promote cell proliferation, migration, anchorage-independent growth, and EMT, which are all involved in cancer initiation and progression [24]. In addition, the mechanisms of TAZ and YAP regulation by Hippo are similar. These findings suggest shared regulation and function between TAZ and YAP; however, there are some apparent differences between them [23]: Although YAP knockout animals are embryonic lethal [25], TAZ null mice are characterized by renal cysts that lead to end stage kidney disease [26], [27]; however, mice lacking both YAP and TAZ die exceptionally early, suggesting there is a potential synergy between YAP and TAZ that exacerbates the individual effects of YAP and TAZ knockout during the embryonic period of mice [28].
As a result of all these evidences, we postulated that YAP and TAZ, which are both downstream targets of the Hippo signaling pathway, cooperate in CRC progression as opposed to acting as two distinct oncogenic proteins. Our results, discussed above, had revealed that patients with high expressions of both YAP and TAZ showed the worst survival outcome in our retrospective cohort study; therefore, we wished to further explore YAP and TAZ cooperation in the initiation and progression of CRC. The purpose of this study was to contribute to accurate prediction of prognosis for patients following surgery, and enable treatments to be tailored to each patient. In addition, because the Hippo signaling pathway has been identified as a vital growth regulator of cell proliferation and apoptosis, establishing a synergistic effect of YAP and TAZ, which are known effectors of the Hippo pathway in other common solid tumors, could enhance understanding of the underlying mechanisms regulating the initiation and progression of cancer.
We confirmed the synergy of YAP and TAZ in the progression of CRC by investigating the effect of YAP and/or TAZ on the proliferation, invasion, migration, and apoptosis of HCT116 colon cancer cell lines. Consistent with a previous report, we found a shared and distinct relationship between YAP and TAZ function [29]: Compared to TAZ, YAP had a more significant effect on the proliferation and apoptosis of CRC cells; in contrast, the converse situation was observed for migration and invasion; as expected, all of these effects were most suppressed when both YAP and TAZ were knocked down. In combination, the colon cancer cell line results confirmed the tissue results of patients with CRC by showing that YAP and TAZ could cooperate to enhance their effects during CRC progression. Considering the multiple functions of the Hippo signaling pathway in the development of cell proliferation and apoptosis [6], these results may partly explain why mice with both YAP and TAZ knockdown died significantly earlier than mice with either YAP or TAZ knockdown [25]-[28]. Several possible reasons may account for the synergy in function between YAP and TAZ: firstly, both YAP and TAZ are major downstream targets of the Hippo pathway, and share many upstream and downstream proteins, such as TEAD [30]-[33], Angiomotin (AMOT) family proteins [34], and Wbp2 [35], [36]. This suggests that YAP and TAZ inevitably share similar functions, as opposed to competitive inhibition, and these may be enhanced through cooperation; secondly, in the same way that two signals are needed to activate T cells, co-expression of YAP and TAZ may be required for optimal functioning of the Hippo signaling pathway.
Two recent studies have been published concerning the functions of YAP and TAZ in CRC [37]
[38]. These have similarities with our work, but also show some differences. The first report, by Yuen et al. (2013), reported that mRNA expression of TAZ, but not YAP, was a prognostic indicator for colon cancer progression by virtue of being associated with increased expression of genes involved in colon cancer progression [37]. The second report, by Barry et al. (2013), demonstrated that a decrease of YAP expression could predict worse patient survival outcomes, and was associated with high-grade, stage IV disease, compared to YAP-positive groups [38]. The discrepancies between these two studies and our work may reflect the different pathological features selected by each study, and the different methods employed: the study by Yuen et al. choose to detect mRNA levels of YAP and TAZ; in contrast, our work focused on the protein levels of YAP and TAZ; the study by Barry et al. was a prospective study, compared to our retrospective study; furthermore, the clinicopathologic features of the two study cohorts were different. For example, patients receiving chemotherapy were excluded from our cohort study, but included in their study; patients in their cohort study group were predominantly white; whereas, our cohort group was confined to Chinese yellow patients, which was a common limitation in these type studies. These limitations indicate that more detailed work is required to clarify the relationship between YAP and TAZ, to further understand the Hippo signaling pathway.
To our knowledge, this study presents the first clinical evidence identifying the relationship between YAP and TAZ as well as the predictive role of co-expression of them in colorectal cancer. Our results indicated that co-overexpression of YAP and TAZ may play an important role in the regulation of tumor progression. Although our sample size was modest, and our analyses will need to be confirmed in a larger patient population, our retrospective study provided convincing evidence that co-overexpression of YAP and TAZ could be an independent predictor of prognosis of patients with CRC. In conclusion, targeting YAP and TAZ could prove to be a promising therapeutic strategy for the treatment of CRC.

Supporting Information
Figure S1
Western blot analysis of YAP expression in HCT116 cells. The molecular weight of YAP is approximately 65 kDa.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
Figure S2
Densitometric quantitation of the relative intensities of b-actin, YAP, and TAZ given in the Western blot analysis of Figure 4A.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
Table S1
Correlation between the positive staining of YAP and TAZ
(DOC)
Click here for additional data file.
