[Abstract, Introduction, Results, Discussion, Methods]

Overexpression of Nuclear Protein Kinase CK2 ? Catalytic Subunit
                    (CK2?) as a Poor Prognosticator in Human Colorectal Cancer. Background Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the most common malignancies but the                         current therapeutic approaches for advanced CRC are less efficient. Thus,                         novel therapeutic approaches are badly needed. The purpose of this study is                         to investigate the involvement of nuclear protein kinase CK2 a subunit                         (CK2a) in tumor progression, and in the prognosis of human CRC.   Methodology/Principal Findings Expression levels of nuclear CK2a were analyzed in 245 colorectal tissues                         from patients with CRC by immunohistochemistry, quantitative real-time PCR                         and Western blot. We correlated the expression levels with clinicopathologic                         parameters and prognosis in human CRC patients. Overexpression of nuclear                         CK2a was significantly correlated with depth of invasion, nodal status,                         American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) staging, degree of                         differentiation, and perineural invasion. Patients with high expression                         levels of nuclear CK2a had a significantly poorer overall survival rate                         compared with patients with low expression levels of nuclear CK2a. In                         multi-variate Cox regression analysis, overexpression of nuclear CK2a                         was proven to be an independent prognostic marker for CRC. In addition,                         DLD-1 human colon cancer cells were employed as a cellular model to study                         the role of CK2a on cell growth, and the expression of CK2a in DLD-1                         cells was inhibited by using siRNA technology. The data indicated that                         CK2a-specific siRNA treatment resulted in growth inhibition.   Conclusions/Significance Taken together, overexpression of nuclear CK2a can be a useful marker for                         predicting the outcome of patients with CRC.

Introduction
Colorectal cancer (CRC) accounted for about 1 million new cases in 2002 (9.4%
                of the world total), and unlike most sites, numbers were not so different in men and
                women (ratio, 1.2:1) [1]. In terms of incidence, CRC ranks fourth in frequency in
                men and third in women. There is at least a 25-fold variation in occurrence of CRC
                worldwide. The highest incidence rates are in North America, Western Europe, and, in
                men especially, Japan. Incidence tends to be low in Africa and intermediate in
                southern parts of South America. In Taiwan, CRC ranks as the second most frequently
                diagnosed malignancy and causes more than 10000 deaths annually (http://www.doh.gov.tw/statistic/index.htm; accessed in December
                2008). In spite of the current surgical techniques and chemotherapy that have made
                significant improvements, the cure rate for advanced CRC remains low and the
                morbidity remains high [2]. Thus, advances in treatment of this disease are likely to
                come from a fuller understanding of its pathogenesis and biological features.
Prognosis of newly diagnosed CRC predominantly relies on the American Joint Committee
                on Cancer (AJCC) stage determined by the depth of invasion, the involvement of the
                lymph nodes, and distant metastasis [3], [4]. However, in fact, it is
                well known that patients with the same AJCC stage CRC display survival
                heterogeneity, with some patients exhibiting relatively short survival times.
                Accordingly, the identification of more promising prognostic factors that are indeed
                highly predictive of CRC patients undergoing surgical treatment is mandatory. Many
                studies have suggested the role that genetic alterations may have in the development
                and progression of CRC [5], [6]. Molecular pathology may be helpful not only to understand
                the disease pathogenesis, but also to give useful prognostic molecular markers. Some
                suggested biological prognostic factors include overexpression of vascular
                endothelial growth factor (VEGF), enhancer of zeste homologue 2 and transglutaminase
                2 [7]-[9].
Protein kinase CK2 (formerly known as casein kinase 2) is a highly conserved
                serine/threonine kinase. It is distributed ubiquitously in eukaryotic organisms,
                where it most often appears to exist in tetrameric complexes consisting of two
                catalytic subunits (aa, a' a' or aa') and two
                regulatory b subunits [10], [11]. CK2 is a remarkably multifunctional protein kinase with
                a vast array of more than 300 substrates, many of which are critically involved in
                the process of cell growth, proliferation, and differentiation [12], [13]. Disruption of
                    Saccharomyces cerevisiae genes encoding both CK2 catalytic
                subunits leads to a failure in development, and the demonstration that knockout of
                the gene encoding the regulatory CK2 b subunit in mice is also lethal reinforces
                the importance of CK2 in the maintenance of cell viability in normal cell life and
                during embryogenesis [14], [15]. In the b subunit, certain cysteine residues may play
                a role in anchoring the kinase to nuclear structures. CK2 activity may have a role
                in cell growth through its signaling to key sites in nuclear matrix and chromatin
                structures [16].
                Several growth stimuli can enhance CK2 nuclear shuttling, so that higher nuclear
                localization is observed in tumor cells compared with normal cells [17], [18].
Moreover, CK2 dysregulation in tumor cells may influence the apoptotic activity and
                to enhance cell survival [19]. CK2 can exert antiapoptotic effects through various
                mechanisms. For instance, CK2 counteract apoptosis by protecting Bid from tumor
                necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL)-induced
                caspase-8-mediated degradation [20]. CK2 is also involved in the phosphorylation of several
                proteins related to apoptosis, including p53and nuclear factor-kB [21], [22]. In addition, Fas
                receptor-mediated cell death is regulated by CK2 expression [23].
The level of CK2 seems to be tightly regulated in normal cells, resisting a change in
                their intrinsic level of CK2 [24]. Increasing evidence indicates that CK2 enzyme is a
                component of regulatory protein kinase networks that are involved in several aspects
                of cellular transformation and cancer [25]. Increases in CK2 level and
                activity have consistently been observed in a variety of human cancers, including
                mammary gland, head and neck, and kidney cancer [26]-[28].
                Overexpression and prognostic significance of CK2 a subunit have only been
                observed in lung cancer, prostate cancer and leukemia [29]-[31]. To our knowledge, the expression
                and prognostic significance of nuclear CK2a in human CRC is still unknown. The
                aims of this study were to investigate the relationship between nuclear CK2a
                expression and clinicopathologic parameters and prognosis in human CRC patients. We
                also evaluated the effects of siRNA-inhibited CK2a expression on the
                proliferation of colon cancer cells.

Results
Basic data
Two hundreds and forty-five CRC patients, 139 males and 106 females, were
                    enrolled in this study. Age ranged from 21 to 88 years olds at first diagnosis
                    (mean 64 years). Based on the AJCC classification, there were 36 stage I
                    patients, 98 stage II patients, 110 stage III patients, and 1 stage IV patient.
                    Follow-up for those patients ranged from 2.93 to 123.97 months (mean 68.3
                    months). During follow-up, 69 patients died of CRC. Postoperative complications
                    did not occur in these patients.
Nuclear CK2a expression was upregulated and associated with several
                    clinicopathologic parameters in CRC
We investigated the expression of nuclear CK2a in 245 CRC patients by
                    immunohistochemistry, and in four patients by Western blot. The results
                    indicated that nuclear CK2a expression was higher in tumor tissues than in
                    non-tumor tissues (Figure
                    1). Additionally, quantitative real-time PCR analysis demonstrated that
                    the expression of CK2a was substantially increased in tumor tissues when
                    compared with non-tumor tissues (Table 1). As shown in Table 2, nuclear CK2a expression had a statistically significant
                    correlation with depth of invasion
                    (P = 0.008), nodal status
                        (P<0.001), AJCC staging (P<0.001),
                    degree of differentiation (P = 0.011), and
                    perineural invasion (P = 0.041). The
                    representative photomicrographs of nuclear CK2a expressions for different
                    parameters were shown in Figure
                        2. There was no significant association between nuclear CK2a
                    expression and age, gender, and vascular invasion.
10.1371/journal.pone.0017193.g001
Figure 1
Expression of nuclear CK2a in colorectal tissues.
Nuclear CK2a expression in non-tumor and tumor tissues, analyzed by
                            immunohistochemistry, was shown in Panel A and
                                B, respectively. Magnification: 400x. Panel
                                C. Nuclear CK2a expression in four non-tumor/tumor pairs
                            was examined by Western blot.
10.1371/journal.pone.0017193.g002
Figure 2
The representative IHC nuclear CK2a staining corresponding to
                            mean nuclear CK2a labeling index values for different
                            parameters.
Magnification: 400x.
Overexpression of nuclear CK2a as an independent prognostic marker for
                    CRC
Correlations of clinical outcomes with nuclear CK2a expression are shown in
                        Figure 3. Inferior
                    overall survival was significantly associated with overexpression of nuclear
                    CK2a (mean labeling index >40%, P<0.0001).
                    Patients with high expression levels of nuclear CK2a had a ten-year overall
                    survival rate of 22.2% compared with 72.5% for patients with low
                    expression levels of nuclear CK2a.
10.1371/journal.pone.0017193.g003
Figure 3
Overall survival analysis of 245 CRC patients stratified by nuclear
                            CK2a immunoreactivity (low nuclear CK2a: mean labeling index
                            <=40%; high nuclear CK2a: mean labeling index
                            >40%).
All statistical tests were two-sided. Significance level:
                                P<0.05.
The uni-variate analysis of prognostic markers of CRC is summarized in Table 3. Nodal status
                        (P = 0.025) and overexpression of
                    nuclear CK2a (P<0.0001) was correlated significantly
                    with overall survival.
This association between overexpression of nuclear CK2a and survival remained
                    even after controlling for other well-known prognostic markers in multi-variate
                    analysis (Table 4). In
                    multi-variate analysis, overexpression of nuclear CK2a was prognostically
                    independent (hazard ratio  = 4.53, 95% confidence
                    Interval  = 2.46 to 8.32,
                    P<0.0001).
Effect of knock down of CK2a on colon cancer cell proliferation
To determine the effect of CK2a expression on DLD-1 human colon cancer cell
                    proliferation, CK2a gene was knocked down by transfection
                    of CK2a-specific siRNA. Scrambled siRNAs were used as controls. After
                    CK2a-specific siRNA treatment, the expression level of nuclear CK2a in
                    DLD-1 cells was significantly inhibited (Figure 4A). However, scrambled siRNA resulted
                    in no significant inhibition (Figure 4A). We counted the number of colonies of siRNA-treated and
                    un-treated DLD-1 cells. The colonies of CK2a-specific siRNA-treated cells
                    were significantly fewer than those of un-treated and scrambled siRNA-treated
                    cells (decreased to 33% (day 8) and 57% (day 14) of those of
                    un-treated cells, respectively) (Figure 4B). The representative photomicrographs were shown in Figure 4C. The results
                    indicated a role played by CK2a in promoting cell proliferation and is
                    consistent with the clinical data described above.
10.1371/journal.pone.0017193.g004
Figure 4
Effect of CK2a gene silencing on colon cancer
                            cell proliferation.
Panel A. Nuclear CK2a expression in siRNA treated and
                            un-treated DLD-1 colon cancer cells was examined by Western blot
                            analysis. Panel B. Histograms representing the cell
                            proliferation assay results based on the average of three independent
                            experiments. *denotes P<0.001 compared with
                            un-treated DLD-1 cells. Panel C. The representative
                            photomicrographs.

Discussion
Elevated CK2a mRNA level has been reported in several human cancers, including
                melanoma and lung cancer [32], [33]. However, despite these studies, clinical data dealing
                with the specific expression of CK2a at the protein level are scarce. One recent
                study showed elevated CK2a protein expression in prostate cancer [30]. To our
                knowledge, this is the only study using immunohistochemistry for evaluating CK2a
                expression in human cancers. The expression of nuclear CK2a in human CRC is
                still unknown. In the present study, the expression levels of nuclear CK2a in
                colorectal tissues from 245 patients with CRC were assessed, and the results showed
                that nuclear CK2a expression was higher in tumor colorectal tissues than in
                non-tumor colorectal tissues.
In addition, our data showed CK2a nuclear accumulation in CRC, consistent with
                previous study conducted in prostate cancer. The mechanistic basis of CK2a
                nuclear accumulation is currently unclear but, as a CK2 catalytic subunit, its
                continuous presence in the nucleus might not only be related to the increased
                proliferative capacity of dedifferentiated tumour cells but also to their marked
                resistance to apoptotic signals. What could be the functional consequence of nuclear
                accumulation of CK2 in cancer cells? One study performed by Scaglioni et al.
                demonstrated that CK2 phosphorylated the promyelocytic leukemia protein (PML, a
                tumor suppressor) and targeted it for degradation by the proteasome [34]. Loss of the
                critical CK2 phosphorylation site in PML resulted in stabilization of this protein,
                enhancement of PML-induced apoptosis. Moreover, in human non-small cell lung
                cancers, there is an inverse relationship between PML expression and CK2 activity.
                Since PML is a nuclear-matrix-associated protein, a nuclear accumulation of CK2 may
                be functionally relevant to inactivate the tumor-suppressive functions of PML. In
                another study, CK2 has been recently described as a key regulator of the tumor
                suppressor NKX3.1 in LNCaP prostate cancer cells. Like PML, it was found that
                blocking CK2 activity in LNCaP cells with inhibitor apigenin led to a rapid decrease
                in NKX3.1 accumulation that was rescued by proteasome inhibition [35].
In the current study, we demonstrated for the first time that overexpression of
                nuclear CK2a in CRC tissues was closely correlated with several
                clinicopathologic parameters including the depth of tumor invasion, lymph node
                metastasis, and perineural invasion. Although the mechanisms underlying these
                associations are still unclear, several lines of evidence for these correlations
                will be discussed in below. Firstly, the evidence for the association between
                overexpression of nuclear CK2 and the depth of invasion comes from matrix
                metalloproteinases (MMPs), which have long been associated with cancer-cell invasion
                and metastasis [36]. A recent study showed that PC-3 human prostate cancer
                cells over-expressing membrane type-1 matrix metalloproteinase (MT1-MMP) grew faster
                than mock-transfected control cells [37]. This result suggested that invasion-promoting MT1-MMP is
                directly linked to tumor aggressiveness. Genome-wide expression profiling of
                MT1-MMP-overexpressing versus MT1-MMP-silenced cancer cells and a further data
                mining analysis of the preexisting expression database of 190 human tumors of 14
                cancer types led to identify 11 genes, including CK2, the expression of which
                correlated firmly and universally with that of MT1-MMP [38]. Secondly, by using
                immunohistochemistry, the association between VEGF-C and the development of lymph
                node metastasis has been described by Yonemura Y et al [39]. In response to hypoxia,
                happened in most tumors grown larger than 1 mm3, the expression of VEGF-C
                can be stimulated by hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) [40]. It was shown that inhibitors
                of CK2 blocked the activation of HIF-1, and then the expression of VEGF-C [41]. Finally, the
                increased neurite formation demonstrated in the previous in vitro
                studies suggests that axonal migration may be a key element of perineural invasion.
                Axonal growth is a complex process that requires neurotrophic growth factors and
                axonal guidance molecules [42], [43]. One study performed by Arevalo et al. showed that nerve
                growth factor, one of the neurotrophic growth factors, can stimulate axon growth
                through activation of CK2 [44].
Our study demonstrated that overexpression of nuclear CK2a can be an independent
                prognostic marker for CRC. Clinical data dealing with the prognostic value of
                CK2a are limited. Using global gene expression profiling, the CK2a gene has
                been identified as a prognostic marker in patients with squamous cell carcinoma of
                the lung [29].
                Laramas et al. provided the evidence for a strong association between a nuclear
                localization of CK2a and poor prognostic factors in human prostate cancer [30]. In addition,
                studies of Kim et al. showed that overexpression of CK2a protein in leukemia was
                associated with poor patient outcome [31]. To our knowledge, there is no report mentioning the
                prognostic significance of nuclear CK2a in human CRC. It is noteworthy to
                observe that, for the first time, overexpression of nuclear CK2a can be an
                independent prognostic marker for CRC. Overexpression of nuclear CK2a is hence a
                useful marker for predicting the outcome of patients with CRC who had a surgical
                resection of the tumor. The patients with CRC showing overexpression of nuclear
                CK2a should be followed-up carefully.

Materials and Methods
Study subjects
The patient cohort comprised 245 consecutive CRC cases from 1998 through 2002
                    documenting pathologic and clinical factors and clinical outcome. None of these
                    patients had received preoperative chemotherapy and/or radiotherapy. The
                    non-tumor part was taken from the grossly normal colorectal mucosa away from the
                    tumor in resected colorectal specimen. Clinicopathologic parameters of CRCs were
                    determined according to the AJCC classification. The follow-up duration was
                    defined as the period between the operation date and day of the last visit,
                    according to the patient's chart. The institutional review board at Chi-Mei
                    Medical Center approved the tissue acquisition protocol to conduct this study.
                    Written informed consent was obtained from each participant before tissue
                    acquisition. Tumor/non-tumor pairs of colorectal tissues were analyzed for
                    nuclear CK2a expression.
Immunohistochemical analysis
Nuclear CK2a expression was analyzed by immunohistochemistry.
                    Paraffin-embedded tissue blocks were sectioned at 5 um and transferred to
                    microscope slides (Muto Pure Chemicals, Tokyo, Japan). Hepatoma was used a
                    positive control for CK2a. The negative control consisted of the omission of
                    the primary antibody and incubation with phosphate buffer saline. After
                    rehyfration and antigen retrieval, antigen blocking was performed using Dako
                    REAL Peroxidase-Blocking Solution (Dako, Carpinteria, CA) for 5 minutes. The
                    slides were subsequently incubated with a primary antibody: polyclonal
                    anti-CK2a (Stressgen Bioreagents, Victoria, Canada) for 30 minutes at room
                    temperature at a dilution of 1:50. Detection of the immunoreactive
                    staining was carried out by the avidin-biotin-peroxidase complex method
                    according to the manufacturer's instructions. A sensitive Dako REAL
                    EnVision Detection System (Dako) was used as the detection system. After
                    incubation with diaminobenzidine for 5-8 minutes, the sections were
                    counterstained and mounted for microscopic interpretation. The immunoreactivity
                    was independently scored by two pathologists (C-F Li and C-L Fang). The
                    percentage of tumor cells with moderate or strong nuclear immunoreactivity was
                    recorded, and scores from the same patient were averaged to obtain a mean
                    nuclear CK2a labeling index. The cutoff of the mean labeling index to define
                    nuclear CK2a overexpression was nuclear reactivity in >40% cells
                    (median value). Clinical data collection and immunohistochemical analysis were
                    performed independently of each other, in an investigator-blinded study.
RNA extraction and cDNA synthesis
According to the manufacturer's instructions, total RNA from 10 tumor and
                    non-tumor pairs of colorectal tissues was isolated by using an RNA extraction
                    kit (Sigma, St. Louis, MO). RNA quality was analyzed by using Agilant 2100
                    Bioanalyzer. The RIN values of all 20 samples were above 7. cDNA synthesis was
                    performed as described in our previous study [45]. Synthesized cDNA was stored
                    at -20degC until use.
Primers and probes
Taqman Gene Expression Assays including primers and probes of CK2a and
                    b-actin, an internal control, were purchased from Applied Biosystems. The
                    Assay numbers of CK2a and b-actin were Hs00751002_s1, and Hs99999903_m1,
                    respectively.
Quantitative real-time PCR
The expression levels of the target genes were measured using quantitative
                    real-time PCR in the ABI Prism 7300 Sequence Detection System (Applied
                    Biosystems) as described in our previous study [45]. Threshold cycle
                            (Ct) is the fractional cycle number at which
                    the fluorescence generated by cleavage of the probe exceeds a fixed level above
                    baseline. For a chosen threshold, a smaller starting copy number results in a
                    higher Ct value. The amount of CK2a mRNA in
                    tumor or non-tumor tissues, standardized against the amount of b-actin mRNA,
                    was expressed as DCtumor or
                            DCnon-tumor  =
                            Ct
(CK2a) - Ct
(b-actin).
Cell culture and siRNA treatment
Human colon cancer cell line (DLD-1) was obtained from the Food Industry Research
                    and Development Institute (Hsinchu, Taiwan). Cells were cultured in RPMI-1640
                    supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (Moregate
                    BioTech, Bulimba QLD, Australia), 100 units/ml penicillin G, 100 ug/ml
                    streptomycin sulfate, and 250 ng/ml amphotericin B (all from Sigma). Cells were
                    grown at 37degC in a humidified atmosphere containing 5%
                    CO2. For siRNA treatment, cells were transfected with 30 nM
                    CK2a-specific or scrambled siRNA (Applied Biosystems), using siPORT NeoFX
                    Transfection Agent. 48 hours post-transfection, nuclear proteins were extracted,
                    and then Western blot was performed to evaluate the effect of siRNA
                    treatment.
Nuclear protein preparation
Total cellular and tissue nuclear proteins were extracted with NE-PER Nuclear and
                    Cytoplasmic Extraction Reagents (Pierce Biotechnology, Rockford, IL), according
                    to the instructions of the manufacturer. The samples were stored at
                    -80degC until used. The protein concentration was determined using a BCA
                    Protein Assay Kit (Pierce Biotechnology) with bovine serum albumin as a
                    standard.
Immunoblotting
Denatured protein samples were subjected to 10% SDS-PAGE. Proteins were
                    transferred to nitrocellulose membranes. Blocked blots were incubated at room
                    temperature overnight with anti-CK2a polyclonal antibody (1:161
                    dilution). b-actin (Sigma, 1:8000 dilution) was used as an internal
                    control for equal protein loading. Blots were further incubated with secondary
                    antibodies conjugated with peroxidase (Sigma) for 1 hour at room temperature.
                    Enhanced chemiluminescence reagents (Pierce Biotechnology) were used to
                    visualize the targeted proteins, which were then semi-quantitatively measured by
                    densitometry. All the experiments were conducted three times, independently.
Cell proliferation assay
After siRNA treatment, the transfected cells were cultured in a 37degC,
                    5% CO2 incubator for 4, 8 and 14 days. Individual colonies
                    (>50 cells/colony) were fixed, stained using a solution of 1% crystal
                    violet in methanol for 30 minutes, and counted. The assay was conducted three
                    times, independently. For each experiment, two wells per condition were used.
                    Error bars are S. D.
Statistical analysis
Differences in nuclear CK2a expression between tumor and non-tumor tissues in
                    the same patient and in cell proliferation were analyzed using a paired
                        t test. Some clinicopathologic parameters were examined in
                    this study. They were age, gender, depth of invasion, nodal status, staging,
                    degree of differentiation, vascular and perineural invasion. The correlation
                    between nuclear CK2a expression and clinicopathologic parameters was
                    examined with kh2 test. All time-to-event endpoints according to
                    various clinicopathologic parameters were plotted by the Kaplan-Meier method and
                    the significance was then determined by a uni-variate log-rank test. In
                    principle, those significant parameters in uni-variate analysis
                        (P<=0.05) were entered into multi-variate Cox regression
                    model to determine the hazard ratio and independence of prognostic impact in a
                    stepwise backward fashion. All of the data were analyzed using the SPSS software
                    version 14 (SPSS, Chicago, IL). A P value of <0.05 was
                    considered significant.
