[Abstract, Introduction, Results, Discussion, Methods, Mixed]

The Notch-2 Gene Is Regulated by Wnt Signaling in
                    Cultured Colorectal Cancer Cells. Background Notch and Wnt pathways are key regulators of intestinal homeostasis and                         alterations in these pathways may lead to the development of colorectal                         cancer (CRC). In CRC the Apc/b-catenin genes in the Wnt                         signaling pathway are frequently mutated and active Notch signaling                         contributes to tumorigenesis by keeping the epithelial cells in a                         proliferative state. These pathways are simultaneously active in                         proliferative adenoma cells and a crosstalk between them has previously been                         suggested in normal development as well as in cancer.   Principal Findings In this study, in silico analysis of putative promoters                         involved in transcriptional regulation of genes coding for proteins in the                         Notch signaling pathway revealed several putative LEF-1/TCF sites as                         potential targets for b-catenin and canonical Wnt signaling. Further                         results from competitive electrophoretic mobility-shift assay (EMSA) studies                         suggest binding of several putative sites in Notch pathway gene promoters to                             in vitro translated b-catenin/Lef-1. Wild type                         (wt)-Apc negatively regulates b-catenin. By induction of wt-Apc or                         b-catenin silencing in HT29 cells, we observed that several genes in the                         Notch pathway, including Notch-2, were downregulated.                         Finally, active Notch signaling was verified in the                                 ApcMin/+ mouse model                         where Hes-1 mRNA levels were found significantly                         upregulated in intestinal tumors compared to normal intestinal mucosa.                         Luciferase assays showed an increased activity for the core and proximal                             Notch-2 promoter upon co-transfection of HCT116 cells                         with high expression recombinant Tcf-4, Lef-1 or b-catenin.   Conclusions In this paper, we identified Notch-2 as a novel target for                         b-catenin-dependent Wnt signaling. Furthermore our data supports the                         notion that additional genes in the Notch pathway might be transcriptionally                         regulated by Wnt signaling in colorectal cancer.

Introduction
The epithelium of the gastrointestinal tract is continually replaced with a turn-over
                rate of two to seven days. In order to maintain homeostasis of the intestinal
                epithelium, processes cellular proliferation, differentiation, migration and death
                must be strictly regulated [1]-[3]. A few but highly conserved signaling pathways are thought
                to drive these processes (reviewed in [4], [5] and [6]). The canonical Wnt signaling
                pathway was the first to be discovered as being essential for intestinal crypt cell
                proliferation and homeostasis [7]-[10]. One central component of this pathway is the cytoplasmic
                protein b-catenin, which when translocated into the nucleus as a result of Wnt
                signals, serves as a co-factor for transcription factors of the Lef-1/Tcf (Lymphoid
                enhancer factor-1/T Cell Factor) family to allow for activation of a downstream
                genetic program [11]. The level of b-catenin in the colon epithelium is
                regulated by the ubiquitinin-proteasome system [12]. One of the critical components
                of the b-catenin destruction complex is the adenomatous polyposis coli (Apc)
                protein [11].
                Mutational inactivation of this gene causes stabilization of b-catenin [13] and
                increased cell proliferation and represents one of the most common genetic
                alterations in colorectal cancer (CRC) [14]. This results in increased
                levels and nuclear translocation of b-catenin and subsequent dysregulated
                activation of LEF-1/TCF target genes [5].
The maturation of intestinal stem cells is also regulated by the Notch signaling
                pathway representing another evolutionary conserved signaling system involved in
                maintaining colon epithelium homeostasis [2]-[4], [15]-[17]. Core
                elements in this signaling pathway are the monomeric transmembrane bound Notch
                receptors (Notch1-4 in mammals), which upon binding to ligand (Deltalike-1,
                -3, -4, Jagged-1 or -2) release an intracellular domain (NICD) that serves as a
                transcriptional co-factor. The specificity of ligand/receptor interaction is
                determined through addition of sugar moieties by the glycosyltransferases from the
                    Fringe gene family (Lunatic fringe,
                    Lfng; Maniac fringe, Mfng and
                    Radical fringe, Rfng) [18]-[20]. NICD translocates into the
                nucleus to form a transcriptional activation complex with the DNA-binding factor CSL
                (Rbp-jk) and co-activators belonging to the Mastermind-like
                family (Maml) [15], [21], [22]. Some of the
                best-characterized targets of this transcriptional activation complex belong to the
                    Hes -and Hey family of genes, which function
                as transcriptional repressors of further downstream targets like
                    Math-1 (mouse homolog of human Hath-1) [23]-[25]. It has been
                suggested that Notch-1 and Notch-2 function redundantly in the gut, and that
                canonical pathway activation through either of these receptors is sufficient to
                prevent differentiation of proliferative crypt progenitor cells into post-mitotic
                goblet cells, indicating that Notch signaling could be predisposing for malignant
                transformation [2]. This has been associated with derepression of the
                cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors p27Kip1 and p57Kip2
[2] as well as
                upregulation of Math-1 mRNA and protein [2], [26], [27]. However,
                    Notch-2 has also been proposed to have a tumor suppressive
                effect in CRC [28],
                suggesting complex, possibly stage related, functions of Notch signaling in the
                intestine.
In addition to the independent roles of Wnt and Notch signaling pathways in
                tumorigenesis in the colon, the findings that tumor development in Apc-deficient
                mice is enhanced upon simultaneous activation of Notch and Wnt signals [29] and that many
                intestinal tumors display abnormal activation of both pathways [3] suggest a molecular interplay
                between Notch and Wnt signaling in the formation of CRC. Despite the apparent
                importance of this crosstalk and that coordinated actions have been reported at
                different levels [30], little is known about the molecular mechanisms linking
                these pathways in the intestinal epithelium. It has been shown that
                    Hath-1 expression is increased when the Wnt pathway is
                inhibited [26] and
                that Hes-1 is a direct target of canonical Wnt signaling in
                colorectal adenomas and carcinomas [29], [31] Furthermore, Jagged-1 has been shown to represent a
                molecular link between Wnt and Notch in CRC, where the Jagged-1
                gene is directly regulated by b-catenin/Tcf-4 [32]. The interactions between Wnt
                and Notch in CRC, and the results thereof, are not fully understood and the results
                from different studies are often diverging [3], [31]. This emphasizes the
                complexity of the crosstalk and suggests that it may not simply be a matter of
                shared downstream targets of the pathways.
In this study, we have investigated the potential of the Wnt signaling pathway for
                direct regulation of genes involved in Notch signaling. This revealed that several
                of the putative promoter regions in Notch pathway associated genes contain
                Lef-1/Tcf-binding sites. Some of these genes were downregulated upon expression of a
                functional Apc gene in the HT29 CRC cell line, supporting the idea that abnormal Wnt
                signaling has a direct impact on the expression of genes encoding proteins involved
                in Notch signaling. Thus, we propose that crucial components of the Notch signaling
                pathway are directly influenced by Wnt signaling with the implication that even a
                genetically normal Notch pathway can contribute to tumorigenesis due to the response
                to b-catenin or Apc mutations.

Results
Promoter sets and in silico identification of potential
                    LEF-1/TCF-sites in Notch pathway promoters
To identify potential targets for interactions between the Notch and Wnt
                    signaling pathways, 65 genes, known to be important for Notch and Wnt signaling,
                    were selected bioinformatically using the Ingenuity Pathways Analysis
                    (Ingenuity(r) Systems, www.ingenuity.com),
                    together with extensive literature searches. Gene promoter sequences were
                    extracted using the Genomatix Gene2Promoter software and the average length of
                    the putative core, proximal and parts of the distal promoters were adjusted to
                    approximately 2500 bp (details available on request). By means of the
                    MatInspector software [33] the promoter sets for putatitve LEF-1/TCF sites were
                    identified with the putative consensus sequences: 5'-(A/T)(A/T)CAA(A/T)G-3'
[34].
                    Twenty-four of the investigated genes in the Notch pathway were found to contain
                    one or several putative LEF-1/TCF sites (Fig. 1 and Supplemental
                        Information S1).
10.1371/journal.pone.0017957.g001
Figure 1
In silico analysis of Notch pathway gene
                            promoters.
In silico analysis of the genetic networks directly
                            involved in Notch and Wnt signaling suggest overlap and direct crosstalk
                            via Notch target gene activation through canonical Wnt signaling. By
                            means of MatInspector, [33] gene promoters in the Notch pathway were
                            found to contain at least one putative LEF-1/TCF-site (number of sites
                            in per gene is described in square brackets). Genes in gray boxes were
                            subjected for further semi quantitative RT-PCR analysis.
Thus, in silico analysis of the genetic networks involved in
                    Notch and Wnt signaling supports the previously shown interactions with
                        Hes-1
[31] and
                        Jagged-1
[32] and,
                    furthermore, suggests a direct crosstalk via target gene activation on several
                    additional levels in the Notch pathway.
The b-catenin/Lef-1-complex binds in vitro to Notch pathway gene
                    promoters
To determine whether the in silico identified LEF-1/TCF binding
                    sequences physically bind to the b-catenin/Lef-1 complex in
                        vitro, we conducted a competitive electrophoretic mobility-shift
                    assay (EMSA) with a radioactively labeled consensus LEF-1/TCF strong binding
                    probe (CD1TOP [35]) and duplex oligonucleotides covering the potential
                    sites in target promoters. Notch pathway EMSA promoter probes (Table S1)
                    were tested against an in vitro translated
                    Lef-1/ss-catenin complex.
To confirm that radioactively labeled CD1TOP binds Lef-1 specifically,
                    plasmid-free reticulocyte lysates were subject to in vitro
                    translation and incubated with a radiolabeled probe. As expected, no binding was
                    observed (Fig. 2). All of
                    the investigated Notch gene promoters,
                    Notch-2, Jagged-1, Maml-1,
                        Hes-1, Rfng, Lfng and
                        Numbl, showed binding of at least one putative LEF-1/TCF
                    site in their promoter regions identified in silico (Fig. 2) (additional
                    competitive EMSA results are found in ). To our knowledge
                        Notch-2, Maml-1, Rfng and
                        Lfng are new potential Wnt target genes not described
                    previously. Two of the strongest binding sites were found in the
                        Jagged-1 promoter at -1933 and -1635 relative
                    to the translation start site, which is in accordance with earlier studies where
                        Jagged-1 has been shown to be a b-catenin/Tcf-4
                    regulated gene in human CRC [32] as well as in mouse hair follicles [36].
                        Hes-1 has recently also been identified as a direct
                    transcriptional target of b-catenin/Tcf-4-dependent Wnt signaling in CRC
                        [31] and
                    our EMSA data supports this notion by clearly identifying Hes-1
                    -528 as a binding site for the b-catenin/Lef-1 complex (Fig.
                    S1).
10.1371/journal.pone.0017957.g002
Figure 2
In vitro translated b-catenin/Lef-1 binds to
                            Notch pathway gene promoters.
Competitive electro mobility-shift assay of the proximal
                                Notch-2 promoter. Duplex CD1TOP probes were
                            "end labeled" with [32P]dATP, incubated
                            with in vitro translated b-catenin/Lef-1 and
                            exposed to competition with abundance of cold or cold mutated promoter
                            duplex oligonucleotides (x300 and x900, respectively). The
                            protein-DNA complexes were separated by electrophoresis and visualized
                            by autoradiography. As a competition control cold CD1TOP and cold
                            mutated CD1FOP competed with radiolabeled CD1TOP and to confirm that
                            radioactive labeled CD1TOP binds Lef-1 specifically, plasmid-free
                            reticulocyte lysate were subjected to in vitro
                            translation and incubated with radiolabeled probe. Gene numbering
                            describe position of the LEF-1/TCF-site relative the gene translation
                            start site. Adjustments in whole image contrast levels were performed in
                            Adobe Photoshop CS4.
The results from both the in silico and DNA binding analyses
                    suggest that a transcriptional network links the Wnt and Notch pathway, implying
                    a functional regulation of canonical Wnt signaling at several levels of the
                    Notch pathway.
Canonical Wnt signaling regulates Notch pathway genes in HT29 colorectal
                    cancer cell line and murine intestinal adenomas
Mutational inactivation of the Apc gene is a key event in
                    colorectal carcinogenesis and renders constitutive active Wnt signaling [13], [14]. In order
                    to develop the in silico and DNA binding analyses and
                    functionally investigate the effects of activated Wnt signaling on Notch pathway
                    genes, nineteen genes in the Notch pathway, known to be important for canonical
                    Notch signaling (Fig. 1 and
                        Table
                        S1), containing putative LEF-1/TCF-sites, were selected for further
                    studies with semi-quantitative RT-PCR. To activate wt-Apc and thereby
                    restricting the levels of nuclear b-catenin, a HT29 cell line carrying a
                    Zn-inducible wt-Apc vector was used. As expected, there was an increase of
                    wt-Apc levels in HT29-APC, 6-24 h post Zn2+-stimulation,
                    but not in HT29-b-gal cells (Fig. 3A). The 19 Notch pathway genes were analyzed by
                    semi-quantitative RT-PCR and Hes-1, Hes-7,
                        Notch-2, Maml-1, Lfng,
                        Rfng, Numb and Numbl were
                    found to be transcriptionally downregulated, while the negatively regulated gene
                        Hath-1 was clearly upregulated 18-24 h post wt-Apc
                    induction (Fig. 3B). As a
                    positive control, the cyclin D1-gene expression, induced by
                    b-catenin [37], was downregulated 6-24 h post Zn-induction,
                    confirming inhibition of the Wnt pathway via expression of wt-Apc and reduced
                    b-catenin levels. The results are in concordance with previous studies where
                    b-catenin protein levels have been found to be downregulated [38] and the
                    b-catenin/hTcf-4 nuclear complex reduced [39] upon Zn-stimulation in
                    HT29-APC cells indicating, decreased levels of nuclear b-catenin.
                    Interestingly, we could not detect any influence of Wnt signaling and wt-Apc
                    expression on Jagged-1 in HT29 cells even though a confirmed
                    specific binding of CD1TOP to in vitro translated Lef-1 was
                    displaced with a 300-fold excess of cold Jagged-1 -1933
                    and -1635 probes but not with their mutated variants (Fig. 2). To determine whether downregulation
                    of the Notch pathway genes, by wt-Apc, are directly under control of
                    b-catenin, we performed anti-b-catenin siRNA silencing experiments
                        (Fig.
                        S2), using a pool of four different siRNAs targeting b-catenin.
                    In general, downregulation was less significant than Zn induced decrease in
                        Notch-2, Numb and Numbl (Fig. 2A), displaying a weak
                    but consistent decrease in their respective mRNA levels. Hes-1
                    was clearly downregulated 72-96 h post transfection, corroborating the
                    findings by Peignon et al. [31]. Rfng and
                        Lfng were not affected by b-catenin silencing
                    indicating that their downregulation by Wnt signaling observed in Fig. 3B may not be a direct
                    effect of b-catenin induced transcription used in this experimental setup.
                        Cyclin D1 was used as a positive control for the siRNA
                    experiments and was clearly downregulated 72-96 h post transfection. To
                    test more long-term effects of deregulated Wnt signaling in intestinal
                    epithelium we analyzed Notch-1, Notch-2 and
                        Hes-1 mRNA expression levels in ApcMin/+
                    mice (Fig. 3C) carrying a
                    germline truncating heterozygous mutation at codon 850. The mRNA levels of
                        mHes-1 were found to be significantly upregulated in
                    adenomas (median relative expression = 2.0, interquartile
                    range = 1.5-2.4) compared to normal intestinal mucosa
                    (median relative expression = 1.5, interquartile
                    range = 0.9-1.7) (Mann-Whitney U-test,
                        p = 0.013), indicating overactivated
                    Notch signaling in the mouse adenomas. A trend towards
                    upregulation was observed for mNotch-2 in tumor tissue (median
                    relative expression = 1.6, interquartile
                    range = 1.0-2.0) compared to normal intestinal mucosa
                    (median relative expression = 1.3, interquartile
                    range = 0.9-1.8) (Mann-Whitney U-test,
                        p = 0.14), while no statistically
                    significant differences could be detected for mNotch-1 (median
                    relative expression = 3.9, interquartile
                    range = 2.5-5.7 (tumor tissue)) vs. (median relative
                    expression = 3.8, interquartile
                    range = 2.4-5.3 (normal tissue)) (Mann-Whitney
                        U-test, p = 0.9).
10.1371/journal.pone.0017957.g003
Figure 3
The expression of Notch pathway genes are dependent
                            of Apc status in HT29 cells and murine intestinal
                            adenomas.
Wt-Apc was induced in HT29-APC cells through the addition of 100 uM
                                ZnCl2 to the growth medium. Semi-quantitative RT-PCR was
                            carried out on cDNA reversely transcribed from 200 ng total RNA from
                            each time point (0-24 h post wt-Apc induction). Bars describe the
                            relative expression of Notch-2 in HT29-APC cells
                            (*) versus HT29-b-galactosidase cells (**) normalized
                            against Gapdh expression. Cyclin D1
                            was used as a positive control for Wnt inactivation. (B) The protein
                            expression of Apc (~310 kDa), Notch-2 (~265 kDa), wt and loading
                            control, Gapdh, was determined with Western blot following 0-24 h
                            of zinc stimulation. Adjustments in whole image contrast levels were
                            performed in Adobe Photoshop CS4. (C) Relative mRNA expression of murine
                                Notch-1, Notch-2 and
                                Hes-1 in tumors and corresponding non-tumor normal
                            intestinal mucosa of ApcMin/+ mice. mRNA expression was
                            related to the endogenous control gene GAPDH. White columns
                            (n = 16), black columns
                            (n = 22). Bars are presented as median expression
                            values. Error bars describe interquartile range.
In conclusion, inactivation of the Wnt pathway through activation of wt-Apc in
                    HT29 CRC cells downregulates several target genes in the Notch pathway while
                    mRNA-levels of the Notch target mHes-1 is significantly
                    upregulated in intestinal tumors from Apc deficient mice. This further supports
                    a direct transcriptional crosstalk suggested by the in silico
                    and in vitro DNA-binding analyses.
The in silico identified Notch-2 promoter contains four
                    putative LEF1/TCF-sites and contributes to a high luciferase gene
                    activity
Notch-2 functions redundantly with Notch-1 in colon epithelial cells where both
                    genes are important for keeping the cells in the crypt compartment in a
                    proliferative and undifferentiated state [2]. However, relatively little
                    is known about transcriptional regulation of the Notch genes
                    and a potential regulation of Notch-2 through Wnt signaling
                    could be of importance in the development and/or progression of CRC and
                    potentially in other malignancies as well. Previously, it has been shown that
                    both Hes-1 and Jagged-1 are direct targets of
                    canonical Wnt signaling in CRC [31], [32]. Our results from in silico,
                        in vitro DNA-binding analyses and activation of wt-Apc,
                    strongly suggest that there is a direct positive regulation of
                        Notch-2 through Wnt-signaling. Therefore we wanted to
                    further elucidate the b-catenin/Lef-1/Tcfs regulating potential of the
                        Notch-2 promoter in the CRC cell lines HT29 and HCT116.
As described above, in silico analyses were used to identify the
                    human Notch-2 promoter and a potential transcriptional start
                    site (TSS) was found 256 bp upstream the translational start site, verifying the
                    result from Gene2Promoter analysis. Four putative LEF-1/TCF consensus sites were
                    identified in the core and proximal promoter region at positions -2261,
                    -869, -689 and -110 relative to the translational start site
                        (Fig. 4A). The
                    -110 site showed strong binding to Lef-1 in the in vitro
                    DNA binding competitive EMSA assay while sites -2261 and -689 showed
                    weak binding (Fig. 2).
10.1371/journal.pone.0017957.g004
Figure 4
The Notch-2 promoter contains four putative
                            LEF1/TCF-sites and results in high luciferase gene activity.
(A) Schematic representation of the proximal Notch-2
                            promoter with the four putative LEF-1/TCF-binding consensus sites,
                            identified with Genomatix MatInspector, at positions -2261,
                            -869, .689 and -110 relative translational start site (ATG).
                            A potential transcription start site was mapped to position -256
                            using Genomatix Gene2Promoter and PromoterInspector software. Uppercase
                            letters indicate the core consensus sequence. (B) N2PR
                            -2327/-99, N2PR -110 in pGL3-TATA as well as empty
                            pGL3-TATA (Smith et al, 2002 [40]) were transfected
                            into HCT116 and and co-transfected with pSV-b-galactosidase control
                            vector. The cell lysate 24 h post transfection was subjected to
                            luciferase reporter assays and relative luciferase activity determined.
                            Error bars describe SEM.
To analyze the Notch-2 promoter, we focused on the 2200
                    nucleotide region spanning both the 5' and 3' regions of the
                        Notch-2 putative transcriptional start site. Two separate
                    constructs were generated, one spanning from position -2327 to -99
                    (N2PR -2327/-99) (numbers relative to translational start site),
                    thereby covering all four putative LEF-1/TCF-sites and one covering putative
                    LEF-1/TCF-site -110. They were cloned into a firefly luciferase reporter
                    vector (pGL3 Luciferase reporter vector, Promega) containing a TATA-box to
                    detect possible enhancer and repressor cis-acting elements
                    (described previously [40]). The constructs were transiently transfected into
                    HCT116 or HT29 cells and reporter gene activities were measured at 24 hours post
                    transfection. Promoter activity was enhanced 13-fold for N2PR
                    -2327/-99 vs. 1.7-fold for N2PR -110 promoter construct
                    compared to the background in HCT116 cell lines (p<0.007 vs.
                    p = 0.04, n = 6 (Fig. 4B)). The luciferase assay shows that
                    the cloned region of the putative Notch-2 promoter contains
                    enhancer elements leading to enhanced transcription of the luciferase gene.
                    These results strongly suggest the location of the core, the proximal part and
                    parts of the distal Notch-2 promoter as identified by the
                        in silico analysis.
Overexpression of b-catenin, Lef-1 or Tcf-4 result in increased Notch-2
                    promoter activity
Notch-2 mRNA and protein levels are clearly downregulated
                    18-24 h post Zn-induction of wt-Apc in HT29-cells (Fig. 3B and B). Notch-2 mRNA
                    expression was also analyzed following RNAi silencing of
                    b-catenin in HT29 cells where a weaker effect was observed similar to the
                    other wt-Apc/b-catenin regulated Notch pathway genes (Fig.
                    S2).
The results from the HT29-APC cell line where Apc was activated or b-catenin
                    silenced, imply an activating role of the Wnt pathway on
                        Notch-2 and the downstream target gene
                        Hes-1
[31].
                    Therefore, we predicted that overactivation of canonical Wnt signaling through
                    b-catenin/LEF-1/TCF would result in increased Notch-2
                    promoter activity. To further elucidate the activation and interactions
                    suggested by the Wnt inactivation experiment, we subjected HCT116 cells to
                    luciferase assays using the N2PR -2327/-99 and N2PR -110
                    promoter constructs. To study if Wnt signaling effects on
                        Notch-2 are mediated through b-catenin/Lef-1/Tcf, cells
                    were co-transfected with high expression vectors (pCGN and pcDNA6) containing
                    S33Y-b-catenin (S33Y mutation), hTcf-4 or mLef-1 sequences and the relative
                    luciferase activity was calculated by normalizing Notch-2
                    promoter activity (N2PR -2327/-99 or N2PR -110) vs.
                    pGL3-TATA-activity. Western blots confirmed expression of His-tagged Tcf-4 and
                    Lef-1 (Fig. 5D). Relative
                    luciferase activity was significantly increased for co-transfection with
                    S33Y-b-catenin, both for N2PR -2327/-99 as well as N2PR
                    -110 with a fold increase of 5.2 for N2PR -2327/-99
                    (p = 0.007) and 1.8 for N2PR -110 (p<0.0001)
                    compared to the pcDNA6 co-transfection (5A, B and Supplemental
                        Information S1). The increase in N2PR -110 activity upon
                    co-transfection with mutated b-catenin was confirmed in HT29 (1.6-fold,
                        p = 0.03) (Fig. S3).
                    The results imply that b-catenin has the ability to activate the core and
                    proximal Notch-2 promoter. Tcf-4 and Lef-1 also enhance the
                    N2PR -2327/-99 activity construct (2.0 fold increase (Tcf-4)
                    (p = 0.02) and 2.8 (Lef-1)
                    (p = 0.001), respectively. However, the increase in
                    activity was not as significant as that seen upon b-catenin co-transfection,
                    indicating more specific effects of the DNA-binding proteins. Tcf-4 and Lef-1
                    failed to significantly affect the activity of N2PR -110 and no
                    differences could be detected between wild-type and mutated construct, where the
                    putative LEF1/TCF site at position -110 was mutated into a
                        SpeI restriction site. These results suggest that LEF1/TCF
                    consensus site -110 is not a direct target of canonical Wnt signaling in
                    this system through Tcf-4 or Lef-1 (Fig. 5B). However, contrasting this, competitive EMSA at the
                        Notch-2 LEF-1/TCF -110 site displayed specific
                    binding to in vitro translated b-catenin/Lef-1 (Fig. 2), where 300-fold excess
                    of cold but not mutated -110 probe displaced the interaction between
                    CD1TOP and in vitro translated Lef-1. Notch-2
                    -2261 and -689 sites only competed weakly with CD1TOP binding to
                        in vitro translated Lef-1 compared to their mutated
                    variants and were these therefore excluded from the ChIP analysis. In addition
                    to EMSA, we examined the DNA-protein binding between Lef-1 or Tcf-4 and the
                        Notch-2 promoter in HCT116 cells transfected with
                    recombinant His-tagged Lef-1 or Tcf-4 by ChIP. To increase the sensitivity,
                    cells were co-transfected with N2PR -2327/-99 and N2PR -110
                    luciferase constructs. Western blots with 6x His tag(r) antibody
                    confirmed efficient transfection of His-tagged Lef-1 and Tcf-4 (Fig. 5D). Following
                    immunoprecipitation and appropriate washing steps, harvested DNA was amplified
                    as a short 93-bp amplicon of the Notch-2 promoter covering
                    LEF-1/TCF-site -110. We observed successful immunoprecipitation of both
                    Tcf-4 and Lef-1 (Fig. 5C),
                    somewhat contradicting the results from the site-directed mutagenesis and
                    subsequent luciferase experiment of site -110. A 178-bp fragment of the
                        NCAPD2 promoter was used as a negative control and showed
                    no immunoprecipitation (Fig.
                        5C).
10.1371/journal.pone.0017957.g005
Figure 5
The Notch-2 promoter is transcriptionally activated
                            via Lef-1/Tcf-4/ss-catenin mediated signaling.
(A) HCT116 cells were co-transfected with pGL3-TATA carrying N2PR
                            -2327/-99 (or empty pGL3-TATA) and HA-S33Y-b-catenin in
                            pCGN, hTcf-4 or mLef-1 in pcDNA6 as well as pSV-b-galactosidase
                            control vector (n = 6). (B) HCT116 cells were
                            co-transfected with pGL3-TATA carrying N2PR -110 (white columns)
                            or mutated N2PR -110 SpeI (black columns) (or empty pGL3-TATA) and
                            HA-S33Y-b-catenin in pCGN, hTcf-4 or mLef-1 in pcDNA6 as well as
                            pSV-b-galactosidase control vector. Luciferase activity was
                            normalized against pGL3-TATA background activity by dividing N2PR
                            -2327/-99-pGL3-TATA relative expression with the relative
                            expression from empty luciferase vector (n = 9).
                            Error bars describe SEM. (C) ChIP in HCT116 cells co-transfected with
                            His-tagged Lef-1 or Tcf-4, N2PR -2327/-99 and N2PR
                            -110; immunoprecipitation with anti-His (6x His tag(r)
                            antibody) or IgG control, PCR with primers encompassing LEF-1/TCF-site
                            -110 in the Notch-2 promoter. A 172-bp segment of
                                NCAPD2 promoter was used as a negative control. (D)
                            Western blots with anti-His (6x His tag(r) antibody) verifying
                            the transfection of His-tagged Lef-1 (~65 kDa) and Tcf-4 (~45
                            kDa) in HCT116. Adjustments in whole image contrast levels were
                            performed in Adobe Photoshop CS4.
Overall, these results suggest that Notch-2 can be
                    transcriptionally regulated by canonical Wnt signaling, however the exact
                    mechanism and interactions sites remain to be elucidated.

Discussion
Wnt and Notch signaling pathways are both important regulators of intestinal
                homeostasis and play major roles in the development of CRC [2]-[4], [7]-[11], [14], [15], [17]. They have
                been shown to have synergistic effects in intestinal cell fate decisions and
                overactivation of Notch signaling in Apc deficient mice results in
                earlier onset and more tumors in the small intestine, compared to
                    Apc deficient mice alone. However, overexpression of Notch
                signaling does not by itself cause intestinal tumor formation in the mouse [16]. Incremental
                evidence suggests a crosstalk between the two pathways [36], [41]-[48] although detailed knowledge
                regarding their transcriptional interaction network is relatively scarce. The
                results of Notch and Wnt interactions in intestinal adenomas are complex and most
                likely context dependent. van Es et al. [3] have demonstrated that blockage
                of Notch in the context of overactive Wnt signaling leads to the differentiation of
                proliferative mouse intestinal tumors into post-mitotic goblet cells and reduced
                tumor growth, something Peignon et al. [31] failed to corroborate in a
                conditional model where both the Apc and RBJ-k
                genes were deleted simultaneously, the latter reflecting a model of more acute Apc
                loss. In the present study, in silico analysis of Notch and Wnt
                pathway gene promoters resulted in the identification of several putative
                b-catenin regulated LEF-1/TCF-sites in Notch pathway gene promoters and
                RBP-Jk-sites in Wnt pathway gene promoters (Fig. 1 and Supplemental
                    Information S1). Tissue-specific gene expression can be predicted from
                the nucleotide sequence approximately 1-2 kb upstream (and partly downstream)
                TSS [49], and
                therefore the length of the promoters, further investigated with the MatInspector
                software were adjusted to approximately 2500 bp. Both Lef/Tcfs and Rbp-jk have
                strong DNA-binding domains and transcription is activated upon binding to
                b-catenin or NICD, respectively [50]-[54]. Twenty-four of the
                investigated gene core and proximal promoters in the Notch pathway contain at least
                one putative LEF-1/TCF consensus site and Hey-2 contains as many as
                six while 28 of the bioinformatically investigated genes in the Wnt pathway contain
                one or more RBP-Jk-sites (Supplemental Information S1). Recently, Rodilla
                and co-workers [32] performed a study where they blocked Wnt signaling
                through b-catenin in Ls17T CRC cells using a dominant negative (dn) Tcf-4
                inducible vector and identified transcriptional targets using microarray mRNA
                expression profiling and quantitative RT-PCR. Interestingly,
                    Jagged-1 was identified as one of the most clearly affected
                targets and transcriptionally activated by the b-catenin/Tcf-4-complex. The
                interaction was verified in vivo thereby establishing Jagged-1 as a
                pathological link between Wnt and Notch pathways in CRC. However, to the best of our
                knowledge, the putative LEF1/TCF-binding sites in Jagged-1
                responsible for this interaction are unknown. The in silico
                determined core, proximal and parts of the distal Jagged-1 promoter
                contains four putative LEF-1/TCF-sites. In this study, we show that the
                b-catenin/Lef-1 complex is capable of binding to the Jagged-1
                promoter in vitro at positions -1933, -1635 and
                possibly -1083 relative to the translation start site (Fig. 2 and Fig. S1) making
                these plausible sites for transcriptional interactions between
                    Jagged-1 and the canonical Wnt pathway. However, upon
                activation of wt-Apc in HT29 CRC cells, no effects on Jagged-1 mRNA
                levels were detected (Fig. 3B),
                which could be a result of different cell lines and study design. In addition to
                    Jagged-1, in vitro translated
                b-catenin/Lef-1 was found to bind LEF-1/TCF-sites in Notch-2,
                    Maml-1, Hes-1, Rfng and
                    Lfng gene promoters. Of these genes Hes-1 has
                been shown to be an important direct target of ss-catenin/Tcf-4 mediated Wnt
                signaling in CRC [31], which our data confirms. A HT29 (lacking wt-Apc) cell
                line carrying a Zn-inducible wt-Apc [39] vector was used to regulate the b-catenin levels and
                usually wt-Apc was detected with Western blot analysis after 6 h of zinc stimulation
                    (Fig. 3A), compared to a
                similar HT29 cell line carrying a Zn-inducible b-galactosidase vector.
Using semi-quantitative RT-PCR, we found Notch-2,
                    Maml-1, Hes-1, Hes-7,
                    Rfng, Lfng, Numbl,
                    and Numb, as well as controls like cyclin D1
                and Hath-1 to be transcriptionally up/downregulated after
                Zn-induced Apc expression (Fig.
                    3B). As expected Hath-1 mRNA levels were upregulated
                synchronously with Hes-1 downregulation, further supporting Wnt
                signaling effects on Notch -and Notch downstream mediators. Several of these
                genes may be regulated through canonical Wnt signaling but upon silencing of
                b-catenin, the downregulation of expected target genes was less significant
                compared to the wt-Apc induction, which may be explained by incomplete inhibition by
                the siRNA treatment (Fig. S2A). It is also possible that the kinetics is different for a
                direct b-catenin inhibition compared to wt-Apc induction, where several
                additional factors like mRNA-degradation and stability may affect the mRNA levels.
                In order to investigate this future studies are warranted. In accordance with the
                results of Peignon et al. [31]
Hes-1 mRNA levels were found upregulated in intestinal tumors from
                Apc deficient mice compared to normal intestinal mucosa. The authors also reported
                significantly higher levels of Notch-1 and Notch-2
                in the murine tumors, something we failed to corroborate even though
                    Notch-2 mRNA levels possibly follow this trend (Fig. 3C). Differences might be
                explained by the use of different models. Their mice mainly develop colonic polyps
                whereas the ApcMin/+ model mostly generates tumors in the small
                intestine. ApcMin/+ mice are heterozygous for the
                    Apc gene, which may lead to heterogenous b-catenin
                activation, which might obscure the effects on the Notch target genes.
Notch-2 mRNA and protein levels were found to be downregulated upon
                wt-Apc induction in HT29 cells (Fig. 3B
                    and B) and results from b-catenin siRNA silencing implied that Wnt
                signaling, at least partially, affects Notch-2 via the
                b-catenin/LEF-1/TCF gene target program (Fig. S2A). Since Notch-1 and
                    Notch-2 have been shown to have redundant roles in the
                intestine [2] a
                potential dysregulation of Notch-2 through disrupted Wnt signaling
                could be of importance in the development and progression of CRC. Contrasting this,
                Chu et al.
[28] found that
                    Notch-2 expression may play a role in tumor inhibition in CRC
                where Notch-2 protein and mRNA levels were found to be decreased and that high
                levels correlates with differentiation of colon cancer cells. Recent evidence shows
                that overactive Notch signaling is an important early event in human colorectal
                carcinogenesis where the pathway is overactivated in cancer-initiating cells and
                early adenomas [32], [55], [56] compared to a lower activity in more advanced or
                metastatic CRCs [29].
                It is therefore not unlikely that Notch-2 is deleted in advanced
                cancer stages but still plays an important role in tumor formation.
                    Notch-1 lacks putative LEF-1/TCF consensus sites in the
                proximal promoter, where Notch-2 contains four LEF-1/TCF sites,
                which may suggest a direct canonical Wnt-dependent regulation of
                    Notch-2 mRNA levels.
We therefore asked whether canonical Wnt signaling could increase the
                    Notch-2 promoter activity. HT29 cells are hard to transfect and
                we therefore used a similar cell line, HCT116, which instead of inactive Apc
                contains a mutated and constitutively active b-catenin gene. Luciferase assays
                indicate an increased activity for N2PR -2327/-99 upon co-transfection
                with mutated b-catenin, Tcf-4 or Lef-1 (Fig. 5A). N2PR -110 only responded to
                b-catenin and the results from the site-directed mutagenesis imply that
                b-catenin affect the Notch-2 core promoter via non-canonical
                Wnt signaling. It is previously known that b-catenin can interact directly with
                NICD [45], [47], [48] and that
                    Notch-1 is autoregulated in mouse lymphocytes [57]. The
                proximal Notch-2 promoter investigated in this study also contains
                two RBP-Jk-sites, indicating a potential autoregulatory mechanism similar to
                    Notch-1 regulation. In a preliminary study N2ICD but not N1ICD
                was found to overactivate the Notch-2 promoter in a luciferase
                assay (unpublished data). Speculatively, b-catenin may interact with N2ICD to
                potentiate the expression of Notch-2, but more studies are needed
                to outline this interaction. Contrasting this, EMSA assays suggested binding of
                Lef-1 to the -110 LEF-1/TCF-site (Fig. 2), which also could be verified with immunoprecipitation where, in
                addition to recombinant Lef-1, recombinant Tcf-4 also successfully precipitated this
                part of the promoter region (Fig.
                    5C). This might suggest that Tcf-4 or Lef-1 have the ability to bind the
                promoter region where site -110 is located if the conditions are satisfied.
                However if this is the site for interaction between Wnt signaling and
                    Notch-2 in CRC is uncertain, and likely a larger part of the
                promoter, and thereby the additional binding sites suggested by the in
                    silico and EMSA analyzes, are needed.
Both Tcf-4 and Tcf-1 are expressed in the
                intestinal mucosa [58], while the cells in the crypts of colon express only
                    Tcf-4
[7], [59].
                    Lef-1 is normally not expressed in the intestinal tract but
                expression has been detected in CRC and several CRC cell lines, together with
                    Tcf-4 and Tcf-1
[7], [58]. This suggests
                that alterations on several levels in the canonical Wnt pathway may contribute to
                overactive Notch signaling, possibly both through mutational inactivation of
                    Apc and/or overexpression of other components in the Wnt
                pathway.
Briefly, we also studied whether the Wnt pathway (i.e b-catenin)
                was transcriptionally regulated by the NICD/Rbp-jk complex, and thereby
                indicating a regulatory feed-back loop, through b-catenin. By g-secretase
                treatment all Notch signaling is effectively inhibited and in our experiments the
                well-known Notch target gene Hes-1
[60], was
                almost completely downregulated (Fig. S4). Previous studies, have established
                Wnt/b-catenin signaling as a negative target of Notch signaling,
                    e.g. through upregulation of Sfrp1,
                    Sfrp5, Dkk1, which are known to encode
                inhibitors of the Wnt pathway [43], [61]-[63]. In our HT29 cell line model, preliminary results cannot
                confirm that b-catenin is a Notch target in CRC cells since we do not see any
                effects on b-catenin or its target cyclin D1 by DAPT treatment
                (blocking of intracellular Notch signaling) (Fig. S4A and B). These results are in close
                agreement with a study by Fre et al.
[16] where the
                expression of Tcf-4 and Lef-1 were found to be unaffected by Notch pathway
                activation in mouse intestine, further indicating Notch-independent activation of
                canonical Wnt signaling. Also, if b-catenin had been negatively regulated by
                Notch in the intestinal tract, inhibition would rather lead to increased number of
                intestinal polyps. Active Notch signaling, however, clearly acts oncogenically in
                this context where Notch inhibition can lead to goblet cell formation and a
                decreased number of polyps [29], [64].
In conclusion, in this paper we identify several potential target genes of
                Wnt/b-catenin signaling among genes traditionally classified as belonging to the
                Notch pathway. Analysis of the genetic networks directly involved in Notch and Wnt
                signaling suggests functional overlap and direct crosstalk via target gene
                activation. More specifically, we suggest that Notch-2 is a novel
                target, activated by Wnt signaling in colon cancer cells.

Materials and Methods
In silico identification of LEF-1/TCF-sites in Notch pathway
                    gene promoters
Identification of potential promoter regions and putative LEF-1/TCF-sites therein
                    was performed with Genomatix software (http://www.genomatix.de,
                    Genomatix Software GmbH, Munich, Germany) [33]. The Gene2Promoter software
                    (Models: library Vertebrate_Modules Version 4.5) was used to retrieve and
                    identify promoters approximately within 2500 bp upstream the first exon of each
                    retrieved gene (complete list is available on request). The highest quality
                    sequence obtained was then used in the MatInspector software (MatInspector
                    Release professional 7.7.3) to search and identify putative transcription factor
                    binding sites [65]. PromoterInspector (Genomatix) was used to verify the
                    transcriptional start site (TSS) in the Notch-2 promoter
                    identified with Gene2Promoter.
The Matrix Family Library Version 7.0 (October 2007) was used and the selected
                    groups were ALL vertebrates.lib where the standard (0.75) core similarity and
                    the optimized matrix similarity was used.
Plasmids, constructs and cloning of the core and proximal Notch-2
                    promoter
Full length murine Lef-1 (mLef-1) and human Tcf-4 (hTcf-4) expressed in pCDNA6
                    were kind gifts from professor B.O Williams while HA-S33Y-b-catenin,
                    expressed in pCGN, was a kind gift from professor Avri Ben-Ze'ev (via
                    professor Anita Sjolander).
For in vitro translation experiments HA-S33Y-b-catenin was
                    subcloned into pCDNA3 (Invitrogen, Cambridge, UK) using XbaI and BamHI
                    restriction enzymes.
A larger Notch-2 luciferase promoter reporter construct (N2PR
                    -2327/-99) (numbering relative to translational start site),
                    covering all four LEF-1/TCF-sites in the Notch-2 promoter, was
                    constructed using primers:
N2PR -2327/-99-forward: 5'-GGTACCTGGGGATTAATAGGCTGTGG-3'
N2PR -2327/-99-reverse: 5'-
                        CTCGAGCTCCTGCTTCAAAGGCTCAG-3',
as well as a smaller (N2PR -110) covering the most proximal LEF-1/TCF-site
                    using primers:
N2PR -110-forward: 5'-GGTACCGTTGCACACCCGAGAAAGTT-3'
N2PR -110-reverse: 5'- CTCGAGATCTTCTCGGTCGCCTCCT-3'.
Forward primers were designed with an additional KpnI restriction site and
                    reverse primers with a XhoI restriction site. PCR-products were cloned into the
                    pGEM-T vector (Promega) according to manufacturer's conditions and then
                    further cloned into pGL3 luciferase reporter (Promega, Wisconsin, USA)
                    containing a TATA-box (described previously [40]) or pGL3-basic (Promega)
                    using KpnI and XhoI.
Site-directed mutagenesis of -110 LEF1/TCF site in the Notch-2
                        promoter
The plasmid pGL3-basic-N2PR -110 was used as the parental clone for the
                    mutagenesis experiment. A mutation in the -110 LEF1/TCF site was generated
                    by replacing the site with a SpeI-restriction site. Briefly,
                    two PCR-amplicons were generated, the first using primers:
N2PR -110 SpeI-forward: 5'-AGGAACTAGTAGCAGGAGGAGGGGAGGA-3' (containing
                    the SpeI restriction sequence) and the pGL3-specific primer
GLprimer2: 5'-CTTTATGTTTTTGGCGTCTTCCA-3', and the second
                    using the pGL3-specific primer RVprimer3: 5'-CTAGCAAAATAGGCTGTCCC-3' and N2PR
                        -110 SpeI-reverse: 5'-CTCGAGGCTAGC ACTAGT GCTCAGGCCCTGGCGCTA-3'
                    (containing the SpeI restriction sequence), with pGL3-TATA-N2PR
                    -110 as a template. Amplicons were separately cloned into the pGEM-T
                    vector and sequentially transferred into pGL3-TATA using KpnI,
                        XhoI and SpeI restriction enzymes thereby
                    mutating the -110 LEF1/TCF core sequence CTTTGA into ACTAGT.
In vitro translation and electrophoretic mobility-shift
                    assay (EMSA)
In vitro translated proteins were prepared with the
                        TNT(r) coupled reticulocyte lysate system (Promega). For
                    protein-DNA binding interaction studies, in vitro translated
                    Lef-1 and b-catenin were incubated with the following 32P-labeled
                    duplex oligonucleotide probe CD1TOP (5'-CTCTGCCGGGCTTTGATCTTTGCTTAACAACA-3'). The
                    binding reaction contained 50 fmol of 32P-labeled probe that was
                    incubated for 30 min with the in vitro translated proteins in
                    10 mM Hepes/70 mM KCl/1 mM dithiotreitol/1 mM EDTA/7.5 mM
                    MgCl2/4% (vol/vol) glycerol/8 ug/ml salmon sperm DNA.
                    For competition experiments, 300 -or 900-fold excess unlabeled double-stranded
                    oligonucleotides (Probes sequences are found in Table S1),
                    used as competitors, were incubated with the extracts at room temperature 10 min
                    prior to probe addition. Bound complexes were separated on 6%
                    polyacrylamide gels, dried and visualized on X-ray film. TNT(r)
                    coupled reticulocyte lysate without in vitro translated
                    proteins was used as a negative control.
Cell cultivation
HCT116 and HT29 colon cancer cells (ATCC, Manassas, VA, USA) were cultivated in
                    McCoy's 5A media (Gibco/Invitrogen) supplemented with 10% foetal
                    bovine serum at 37degC in 5% CO2. Twenty-four hours prior to
                    transfection or chromatin immunoprecipitation, the cells were split with
                    0.05% Trypsin-EDTA (Gibco/Invitrogen) and counted.
ZnCl2-induction of wild-type (wt) Apc in
                        HT29
HT29 cells harbouring a vector carrying the wt-Apc gene
                        (HT29-APC) or the control gene b-galactosidase
                        (HT29-b-galactosidase), regulated by a zinc inducible promoter (generous
                        gift from professor B. Vogelstein) were cultivated as described above, with
                        the exception that cells were selectively grown by the addition of
                        1.2% hygromycine B (Invitrogen). Twenty-four hours before harvest,
                        the cells were split with 0.05% Trypsin-EDTA and counted. HT29-APC
                        and HT29-b-gal. were seeded in MULTIWELL(tm) 6 well (Falcon, BD
                        Bioscience, San Jose, CA) (1,0x106/well) and 100 uM
                            ZnCl2 was added to the medium in the interval of 24, 18, 12,
                        6, 3 and 0 hours before cell harvest and RNA as well as protein
                        isolation.
siRNA treatment of HT29 cells
Cells for siRNA transfection were seeded in MULTIWELL(tm) 12 well (Falcon)
                            (2.5x105/well), as described above. A pool of four
                        different siRNA oligonucleotides targeting b-catenin mRNA (siGENOME
                        SMARTpool(tm), Dharmacon, Chicago, IL, USA) with the sequence:
                            GAUCCUAGCUAUCGUUCUU,
                            UAAUGAGGACCUAUACUUA,
                            GCGUUUGGCUGAACCAUCA,
                            GGUACGAGCUGCUAUGUUC,
                        were transfected into HT29 with DharmaFECT4(tm) transfection reagent
                        (Dharmacon) according to the manufacturer's recommendations. The final
                        siRNA concentration was 100 nM. As control experiment, cells were in
                        parallel mock transfected with siGLO(r) transfection indicator (Dharmacon)
                        only or a non-specific siRNA pool (siCONTROL(tm) Non-Targeting siRNA
                        pool, Dharmacon).
RNA and protein isolation
RNA and protein was isolated with the PARIS(tm) Kit (Ambion Inc., Austin, TX,
                    USA) according to the supplier's recommendations. The protein concentration
                    was spectrophotometrically measured using Bradford Reagent (Sigma, St. Louis,
                    USA). Briefly, 2 uL sample was mixed with 98 uL Milli-Q H2O and
                    1 mL Bradford Reagent. As standard curve 0/1/2/4/8 1 mg/mL BSA (Sigma) was mixed
                    with Milli-Q H2O to a final volume of 100 uL and then 1 mL
                    Bradford reagent was added. The samples were immediately vortexed and 200
                    uL sample was added to an ELIZA plate and measured by THERMOmax microplate
                    reader (Molecular Devices) with SOFTMAX software (Molecular Devices). All
                    measurements were performed in duplicates.
cDNA synthesis and semi-quantitative RT-PCR
200 ng total RNA from each sample was reversely transcribed into cDNA with
                    SuperScript(tm)III (Invitrogen) according to the supplier's
                    recommendation. To determine the expression of Apc or silencing of
                    b-catenin, the well-established target gene of an active Wnt pathway,
                        cyclin D1, was used as a positive control [9]. As negative
                    controls and controls for equal loading the endogenous genes
                        Gapdh was used. For quantitative assessments, the mRNA
                    expression was normalized against Gapdh. 1 uL of cDNA
                    solution was added to 19 uL of a standard master mix containing 0.5 units
                    of ThermoWhite DNA Polymerase (Saveen Werner AB, Limhamn, Sweden) and 1 uM
                    of the appropriate primers (Supplemental Information S1 for primer
                    sequences and PCR-conditions). Separation of the PCR products was achived in
                    1.5% agarose gels and detection with ethidium bromide and UV-light. The
                    software Quantity One (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA, USA) was used for
                    semi-quantitative densiometric analysis.
Western blot
Cell lysates containing equal amounts of total protein were denatured in
                    NuPAGE(r) LDS Sample Buffer (Invitrogen) at 70degC for 10 min with
                    NuPAGE(r) Sample Reducing Agent (Invitrogen). The proteins were separated at
                    200 V for 35 min in NuPAGE(r) 4-12% Bis-tris gels (Invitrogen)
                    held in NuPAGE(r) MES DS Running Buffer (20x) diluted 1:20 with
                        H2O, 0.25% NuPAGE(r) Antioxidant (Invitrogen) was added
                    to the inner chamber. After the separation, the proteins were blotted to PVDF
                    membranes (Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA) at 30 V for 60 min in NuPAGE(r) Transfer
                    Buffer (20x) (Invitrogen) diluted 1:20 in H2O with
                    20% methanol and 0.1% NuPAGE(r) Antioxidant. The PVDF membranes
                    were blocked with 5% Blotto (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc., Santa Cruz,
                    CA, USA) dissolved in Tris-buffered saline with 0.1% Tween(r)- 20
                    (TBS-T) (Sigma) for 60 min at room temperature. The primary antibodies added to
                    the PVDF membranes were diluted in TBS-T as follows: anti-APC 1:500
                    (Abcam, Cambridge, UK), anti-b-catenin 1:1000 (Millipore Corp.,
                    Mosheim, France), anti-Gapdh 1:2000 (Millipore), anti-Notch-2 1:2000
                    (Santa Cruz) and anti-His (6x His tag(r) antibody) 1:1000 (Abcam).
                    The antibodies were incubated for 60 min at room temperature or over night in
                    4degC, washed in TBS-T, followed by incubation for 60 min at room temperature
                    with appropriate secondary antibodies, goat-anti-mouse 1:10000 (Jackson
                    ImmunoResearch Europe Ltd., Suffolk, UK) and goat-anti-rabbit 1:10000
                    (Cayman Chemical, Ann Arbor, MI, USA). The PVDF membranes were exposed to ECL
                    Western Blotting Substrate (Pierce) and photographed digitally. Before
                    reincubation of the membranes, the antibodies were stripped with Restore(tm)
                    Western Blot Stripping Buffer (Thermo SCIENTIFIC, Rockford, IL, USA) for 15 min
                    at room temperature and washed in TBS-T.
Animals and handling of tumor specimens
C57BL/6 mice with the APCMin/+ genotype (The Jackson Laboratory,
                    Bar Harbor, ME, USA) were used in the present study Animals were housed in
                    ventilated cages at 23+-1degC with a 12-h light/dark cycle. Standard
                    diet (CRME rodent, Special Diet Services Ltd., Witham, Essex, UK) and water were
                    available ad libitum. DNA for genotyping was isolated from tail
                    biopsies with the Extract-N-Amp Tissue PCR Kit(tm) (Sigma), according to
                    supplier's recommendations. The Apc encoding gene were
                    genotyped as previously described [66]. All experimental
                    procedures were approved by the animal Care and Use Committee at the
                    Linkoping University (Permit Number: 44-06).
Tumors and non-tumor intestinal mucosa specimens were collected and handled as
                    previously described [67]. mRNA expression of mNotch-1,
                        mNotch-2 and mHes-1 was subsequently
                    determined with the 7500 Fast Real-Time PCR System (Applied Biosystems, Foster
                    City, CA, USA), using predesigned primer/probe assays purchased from Applied
                    Biosystems (sequences available at request). Ct
                    values were related to the endogenous control gene GAPDH
                        (DCt), and relative expression
                            (2-DCt) was normalised to the
                    average expression in non-tumor intestinal mucosa of
                        APCMin/+mPGES-1+/+ mice
                        (2-DDCt).
Luciferase reporter assay
24 hours prior to luciferase reporter assays, HCT116 or HT29 cells were seeded
                    and co-transfected with 200 ng reporter vector (pGL3-TATA with and without N2PR
                    -2327/-99 or -110 insert), 95 ng pSV-b-galactosidase and
                    455 ng pCGN-HA-S33Y-b-catenin, pcDNA6-mLef-1 or pcDNA6-hTcf-4, using
                    Lipofectamine LTX(r) according to supplier's recommendations. Controls
                    were co-transfected with empty pCDNA6 vector and 24 h post transfection both
                    luciferase and b-galactosidase activities were measured. As a background
                    control, pGL3-TATA without insert was used and treated as described above. The
                    luciferase activity was determined by the ratio of luciferase to
                    b-galactosidase activity and the relative activity by the ratio of promoter
                    activity vs. background control.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation
To investigate binding of LEF-1/TCF-family members Lef-1 and Tcf-4 to
                        Notch-2 LEF-1/TCF-site -110, chromatin
                    immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays were carried out using a ChIP Assay Kit
                    (Millipore). Briefly, 2.5x105 HCT116 cells/well were seeded in
                    MULTIWELL(tm) 6 well (Falcon) and co-transfected with 200 ng pGL3-TATA-N2PR
                    -2327/-99, 200 ng pGL3-TATA-N2PR -110 and either 2.1 ug
                    6xhistidine tagged pcDNA6-hTcf-4 or pcDNA6-mLef-1, respectively, using
                    Lipofectamine LTX (Invitrogen). 48 h post transfection, cells were fixed with
                    1% formaldehyde for 10 minutes and washed twice in ice-cold
                    phosphate-buffered saline. Cells were lysed in sodium dodecyl sulfate lysis
                    buffer (1% sodium dodecyl sulfate, 10 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl [pH
                    8.0]) containing protease inhibitors, and DNA in the cross-linked chromatin
                    preparations was sonicated to an average fragment size of 0.2-1.0 kb using
                    a Bioruptor(tm) (Diagenode, NJ, USA) and 14 pulses for 30 seconds sonication
                    followed by 30 seconds of rest. The insoluble material was removed by
                    centrifugation, and soluble chromatin samples were precleared with a 50%
                    slurry of protein A-Sepharose-salmon sperm DNA. Each sample was incubated
                    overnight at 4degC with 5 ug of rabbit polyclonal antibodies 6x
                    His tag(r) antibody - ChIP Grade (Abcam). As a negative isotype control,
                    Normal rabbit IgG (Millipore) was used. Immune complexes were collected with
                    protein A-Sepharose and eluted. Input templates were purified from 5% of
                    the original lysates in parallel with the eluted immunoprecipitated samples.
                    Cross-linking was reversed by incubation at 65degC for 4 h in 200 mM NaCl.
                    After phenol-chloroform extraction and ethanol precipitation, the recovered DNA
                    (2 ul from immunoprecipitated chromatin DNA samples or 2 ul from the
                    input DNA control) was subjected to PCR amplification with the following
                    primers:
N2PR -110 ChIP forward: 5'- GGGGAGTCGAGGCATTTG -3'
N2PR -110 ChIP reverse: 5'- AGGAGCCCCACTCTCTCCT -3'.
As a negative control 170 bp of the NCAPD2 (non-SMC condensin I complex, subunit
                    D2) were amplified using primers:
NCAPD2 ChIP forward: 5'-ATGGTTGCCACTGGGGATCT-3'
NCAPD2 ChIP reverse: 5'-TGCCAAAGCCTAGGGGAAGA-3'.
Statistic, graphs and image handling
All statistics and graphs are computed in GraphPad Prism 5 (GraphPad Software
                    Inc., San Diego, CA, USA) or SPSS v15.0 (SPSS UK Ltd, Woking, UK). Group
                    comparisons for the in vitro luciferase assays were performed
                    using Independent sample t-tests and error bars describe the standard error of
                    the mean (SEM). Differences in mRNA levels between mouse adenomas and normal
                    murine intestinal tissue were analyzed with the Mann-Whitney
                    U-test (non-normal distributed data) and error bars describe
                    the interquartile range. Figure composition and adjustments in whole image
                    contrast levels were performed in Adobe Photoshop CS4.

Supporting Information
Figure S1
Competitive electro mobility-shift assay reveals binding of
                                in vitro translated
                            b-catenin/Lef-1 to Notch
                            pathway gene promoters. Duplex CD1TOP probes were "end
                        labeled" with [32P]dATP, incubated with
                            in vitro translated Lef-1/b-catenin and exposed to
                        competition with abundance of cold duplex oligonucleotides (x300 and
                        x900, respectively). The protein-DNA complexes were separated by
                        electrophoresis and visualized by autoradiography. As a competition control
                        cold CD1TOP and cold mutated CD1FOP competed with radiolabeled CD1TOP and to
                        confirm that radioactive labeled CD1TOP binds Lef-1 specifically,
                        plasmid-free reticulocyte lysate were subjected to in vitro
                        translation and incubated with radiolabeled probe. Competition of cold and
                        -cold mutated Jagged-1 -1933, -1635,
                        -1083, -238, Maml-1 -746, -698,
                        -1864 and Hes-1 -528, -568, -476,
                        Positive competitor control, plasmid free reticulocyte lysate,
                            Notch-2 -2261, -869, -689,
                        -110, Rfng -2481, Numb
                        -342, Lfng -2128, -1513, -1291,
                        -1023 and Numbl -2587, -2480 and
                        -1919. Numbering of putative LEF-1/TCF-sites is relative to each
                        gene's translational start site.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
Figure S2
Notch pathway gene expression following
                                RNAi silencing of
                            b-catenin in HT29 cells. Gene expression was normalized
                        against the negative control Gapdh. The expression is
                        presented 0-96 h post transfection. (A) The expression of
                            Cyclin D1, Gapdh,
                            Hes-1, Hes-7,
                        Notch-2, Maml-1, Lfng,
                            Rfng, Numb land Numb.
                        (B) The protein expression of b-catenin (~88 kDa) and loading
                        control, Gapdh, 0-96 h post transfection of
                        anti-b-catenin-siRNA.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
Figure S3
b-catenin and cyclin D1
                            expression remain unaffected in DAPT treated HT29 cells. HT29
                        cells were treated with 12.5 uM of the g-secretase inhibitor DAPT
                        for 24 h thereby inhibiting Notch signaling. (A) Western blots with Hes-1
                        and b-catenin antibodies on HT29 whole-cell lysate following 24 h DAPT
                        treatment. Gapdh was used as a loading control. (B) The
                        expression of cyclin D1 was semi-quantitatively determined
                        in DAPT treated HT29-cells. Semi-quantitative RT-PCR was carried out on cDNA
                        reversely transcribed from 200 ng total RNA. Bars describe the relative
                        expression of cyclin D1 in HT29 normalized against
                            Gapdh expression.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
Figure S4
HT29 cells were co-transfected with pGL3-TATA carrying N2PR -110 (or empty
                        pGL3-TATA) and HA-S33Y-b-catenin in pCGN as well as
                        pSV-b-galactosidase control vector (n = 6).
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
Table S1
(XLS)
Click here for additional data file.
Supplemental Information S1
(DOC)
Click here for additional data file.
