[Abstract, Introduction, Methods, Results, Discussion]

HDAC Inhibition Decreases the Expression of EGFR in Colorectal Cancer
                    Cells. Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), a receptor tyrosine kinase which                     promotes cell proliferation and survival, is abnormally overexpressed in                     numerous tumors of epithelial origin, including colorectal cancer (CRC). EGFR                     monoclonal antibodies have been shown to increase the median survival and are                     approved for the treatment of colorectal cancer. Histone deacetylases (HDACs),                     frequently overexpressed in colorectal cancer and several malignancies, are                     another attractive targets for cancer therapy. Several inhibitors of HDACs                     (HDACi) are developed and exhibit powerful antitumor abilities. In this study,                     human colorectal cancer cells treated with HDACi exhibited reduced EGFR                     expression, thereby disturbed EGF-induced ERK and Akt phosphorylation. HDACi                     also decreased the expression of SGLT1, an active glucose transporter found to                     be stabilized by EGFR, and suppressed the glucose uptake of cancer cells. HDACi                     suppressed the transcription of EGFR and class I HDACs were proved to be                     involved in this event. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis showed that HDACi                     caused the dissociation of SP1, HDAC3 and CBP from EGFR promoter. Our data                     suggested that HDACi could serve as a single agent to block both EGFR and HDAC,                     and may bring more benefits to the development of CRC therapy.

Introduction
EGFR (also known as ErbB-1/HER1), which belongs to the ErbB family of receptor
                tyrosine kinases, comprises an extracellular ligand-binding domain, a single
                hydrophobic transmembrane domain and a cytoplasmic tyrosine kinase-containing domain
                    [1]. Ligand
                binding induces homo- or hetero-dimerization of receptor and subsequent activation
                of the pathways including Ras/Raf/MEK/ERK and PI3K/PDK1/Akt [1]. Most of colorectal cancer
                (CRC) is characterized with overexpression of epidermal growth factor receptor
                (EGFR) and predicted with high risk of metastasis and recurrence [2]. Targeting
                EGFR seems to be a promising approach for the CRC treatment. Indeed, cetuximab, a
                human-mouse chimeric IgG1 antibody binds to the external domain of the EGFR, has
                been approved by FDA in 2004 for the treatment of metastatic colorectal cancer [3]. After that, a
                fully humanized antibody, panitumumab, is also approved to treat CRC [4]. However,
                accumulating evidences demonstrate that the effects of targeting EGFR in colorectal
                cancer are largely limited due to the status of KRAS mutation [5]. The KRAS mutants bypass EGFR
                to activate the Ras/Raf/MEK/ERK signals, and significantly weaken the therapeutic
                effect of cetuximab [6]. Examination of KRAS status is now a prerequisite for the
                use of cetuximab [7]. Although ~60% of CRC patients expressed
                wild-type KRAS but only half of them benefits from cetuximab. Therefore, the KRAS
                status is not the only determinant for the efficacy of EGFR target therapy [8]. Therefore,
                treatment with a broad spectrum of genetic backgrounds is urgently needed and would
                benefit most patients irresponsive to cetuximab-based therapies.
Although EGFR is a receptor tyrosine kinase and delivers signals after ligand
                conjugation, its prosurvival effect can be independent to kinase activity. For
                example, mice lacking EGFR are embryonic lethal but those harboring kinase-inactive
                mutants only exhibit some epithelial defects [9], [10]. In addition, loss of EGFR
                kinase activity decelerates cell proliferaiton but loss of its expression ruins the
                glucose uptake and leads to cell death [11]-[13]. Therefore, inhibition of EGFR
                expression may be a better strategy for CRC therapy.
Histone deacetylases (HDACs) which removes the acetyl groups from histone to silence
                the gene transcription are highly expressed in various tumors [14], [15]. HDACs have become one of the
                emerging targets for cancer therapy, and HDAC inhibitors (HDACi) show promising
                anticancer activities [15]. Among various HDACi, SAHA (Vorinostat) had been
                successfully approved for the treatment of cutaneous T cell lymphoma (CTCL). HDAC
                family can be subdivided into four classes and the class I HDACs, which includes
                HDAC1, HDAC2, HDAC3 and HDAC8, have been reported to be highly expressed in colon
                cancer [16].
                The pro-proliferative effects of HDACs are connected to the transcriptional
                repression of cdk-inhibitor, p21, and knockdown of HDAC 1, 2 and 3 reduced the
                growth of several colon cancer cells [17]. Therefore, HDAC may serve as a
                potential target for CRC therapy, and SAHA had entered clinical trials for the
                treatment of CRC [18].
In this study, we demonstrated that the EGF signaling in KRAS mutant cell lines,
                HCT116 and SW480, was disrupted by HDACi through transcriptional repression of EGFR
                expression, indicating that HDACi served as a single agent to block EGFR and HDAC
                simultaneously. Loss of EGFR partially contributed to the cytotoxic effect of HDAC
                inhibitors. In addition, the expression of SGLT1, an active glucose transporter
                which is stabilized by EGFR, was also decreased by HDACi and led to the reduction of
                glucose uptake in colon cancer cells. The mechanism underlying the transcriptional
                repression of EGFR by HDACi was involved with the histones hypoacetylation and the
                dissociation of SP1, HDAC3 and CBP from EGFR promoter. Our data suggested that HDACi
                could serve as a single agent to concurrently block both EGFR and HDAC, and may
                bring benefits to the CRC patients with a broader range of genetic backgrounds.

Materials and Methods
Ethics Statement
All patient-derived specimens were collected and archived under protocols
                    approved by Institutional Research Board of National Taiwan University Hospital
                    and supported by the National Science Council, Taiwan. A full verbal explanation
                    of the study was given to all participants. They consented to participate on a
                    voluntary basis.
Materials
TSA was purchased from Sigma and SAHA were obtained from Merck. The Myc-tagged
                    HDAC1, 2 and 3 were provided by Dr. WM Yang (NCHU, Taiwan). Antibodies specific
                    for EGFR, p21, HDAC3, and actin were purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology.
                    Anti-Ac-histone H3, H4, and Sp1 antibodies were obtained from Upstate.
                    Anti-SGLT1 antibody was purchased from Abcam.
Cell culture
HCT-116 (from Van Dyke MW, M.D. Anderson) and SW480 (from TH Leu, NCKU) human
                    colon carcinoma cells were cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10% fetal
                    bovine serum; A431 (human epidermoid carcinoma cells) and MDA-MB-468 (human
                    breast adenocarcinoma cells) obtained from ATCC were maintained in RPMI
                    supplemented with 10% FCS.
RNA isolation, RT-PCR and real time PCR
Total RNA was isolated from HCT116 cell using Trizol reagent (Life Technology).
                    Reverse transcription reaction was performed using 2 ug of total RNA,
                    reverse transcribed into cDNA using oligo dT primer. cDNA was subjected to
                    RT-PCR and amplified 30 cycles using two oligonucleotide primers derived from
                    published EGFR or GAPDH sequence, including 5'- TGGAGCTACGGGGTGACCGT-3' and 5'-GGTTCAGAGGCTGATTGTGAT-3'
                    (EGFR), 5'-AAGCCCATCACCATCTTC-CAG-3' and 5'-AGGGGCCATCCACA-GTCTTCT-3'(GAPDH) and
                        5'-TGAC-GGGGTCACCCACACTGTGCCCATCTA-3' and
                        5'-CTAGAAGCATTTGCG-GGGACGATGGAGGG-3'(Actin).
                    The PCR products were subjected to 1.2% agarose gel electrophoresis and
                    visualized by ethidium bromide staining. Real time PCR was performed with cDNA
                    samples using the ABI Prism 7900 Sequence Detection System (Applied Biosystems,
                    Foster City, CA). Primers were as follows: EGFR (forward primer, 5'-TTCCTCCCAGTGCCTGAAT-3'
                    reverse primer, 5'-GGTTCAGAGGCTGAT-TGTGAT-3'); Actin (forward
                    primer, 5'-CCAACCG-CGAGAAGATGA-3'; reverse primer,
                        5'-TCCATCACGATGCCAGTG-3'). The data were
                    normalized by the Actin housekeeping gene detection.
Cell proliferation
For growth inhibition analysis, HCT116 cells were seeded at a density of
                        3x103 cells per well in 96-well plates. After seeding, the
                    growth medium was replaced with medium containing indicated concentration of
                    TSA. After 3 days, cell growth was measured using
                    3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (Sigma, St. Louis,
                    MO) colorimetric method. Cell cycle was determined by flow cytometry using a
                    propidium iodide stain buffer and analyzed on a BD FACS Calibur cytometer with
                    Cellquest software.
Measurement of Intracellular Glucose
Prior to harvesting, adherent cultures of control and TSA-treated cells in DMEM
                    containing 1 or 4.5 mg/ml glucose were washed twice with cold phosphate-
                    buffered saline (PBS) and then lysed with ion-freeH2O for 5 min on
                    ice. The glucose content was measured with D-glucose measurement kit (GAHK-20,
                    Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) according to the manufacturer's
                    protocol.
Transient transfection and luciferase activity assay
The EGFR promoter plasmid containing a firefly luciferase was transiently
                    transfected into HCT116 cells with Arrestin transfection reagent. Briefly, 0.9
                    ug of plasmid DNA, 0.1 ug of Renilla luciferase, and 5 uL
                    transfection reagents were mixed, and the transfection protocol was carried out
                    according to the manufacturer's instructions (Promega). Six hours after
                    transfection, the cells were cultured in the normal complete medium for another
                    16 h. Then, the transfected cells were subjected to luciferase assay. The
                    firefly luciferase activity was normalized to that of the Renilla
                    luciferase.
Preparation and infection of shHDAC-expressing lentivirus
Briefly, 6 ug pCMV-dR8.91, 3 ug pMD2.G, and 9 ug
                    pLKO-shLuciferase, pLKO-shHDAC1, pLKO-shHDAC2 or pLKO-shHDAC3 were cotransfected
                    into HEK293T cells using Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen). The supernatants
                    containing infectious shLuciferase, shHDAC1, shHDAC2 or shHDAC3 lentivirus were
                    collected on day 3 after transfection and stored at -80degC. For
                    lentivirus infection, 2x105 HCT116 cells were infected with
                    shLuciferase, shHDAC1, shHDAC2 or shHDAC3 lentivirus at a multiplicity of
                    infection (MOI) of 1.
Patients and specimen preparation
Specimens of tumor tissue and adjacent normal tissue of colon were obtained from
                    14 patients who have been pathologically diagnosed colon cancer and underwent
                    surgical resection at the National Taiwan University Hospital. Tissue specimens
                    were ground, then sonicated in the lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, 1 mM
                    EGTA, 150 mM NaCl, 5% Triton X-100) with protease inhibitors. The samples
                    were microcentrifuged to remove the larger debris and subjected to western
                    analysis.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay
Cells were treated with 5 uM SAHA for 6 h and cross-linked with
                    1.42% formaldehyde for 15 min. Cells in two 10-cm dishes were scraped in
                    1 ml of cold PBS, centrifuged, and lysed in 1 mL of IP buffer (150 mM NaCl, 50
                    mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 5 mM EDTA, 0.5% Nonidet P-40, and 1% Triton
                    X-100) containing protease inhibitors (1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, 1
                    uM leupeptin and 1 uM aprotinin). The nuclear pellet was resuspended
                    in IP buffer and sonicated to shear chromatin. The sonicated lysates were
                    immunoprecipited with antibodies against SP1, AcH3, AcH4, H3K4Me2, CBP and
                    HDAC3, respectively and the immune complexes were recovered with protein
                    A-Sepharose (Roche). The immunoprecipitated DNA and input DNA were extracted by
                    incubating with 100 ul of 10% Chelex (Bio-Rad), boiling to reverse
                    the cross-link, and centrifuging to remove Chelex slurry. Real-time PCR was
                    performed with the purified DNA using the following primers: A: 5'- GTGAAAAACCCCACCGTTC-3'
                    and 5'-
                        TCTGAAGGGGAGCAACCTTA-3'; B: 5'-AAGCTTCCGCGAGTTTCC-3' and
                        5'-
                        GAGGCTAAGTGTCCCACTGC-3'; C: 5'- ACCCTGGCACAGATTTGG-3'
                    and 5'-
                        TGAGGAGTTAATTTCCGAGAGG-3'; D: 5'-CCAGTATTGATCGGGAGAGC-3'
                    and 5'-
                        TTCCTCCAGAGCCCGACT-3'; E: 5'-CTGAGGAAGGAACCCAAAAA-3'
                    and 5'-GGGAGGTCCTCTCAGAA
                        AGC-3'.
Statistical analysis
Triplicate experiments were performed and results are presented as
                    mean+-SE. The two- tailed Student's t test was used to calculate the
                    statistical significance between group

Results
HDAC inhibitors disrupt the EGF signaling via silencing EGF receptor (EGFR)
                    expression
To examine the antitumor effect of HDACi in colorectal cancer, KRAS wild type
                    (WiDR and HT29) and KRAS mutant cells (HCT116 and SW480) were treated with SAHA
                    or cetuximab for 48 hours, and cell viability was measured. SAHA reduced the
                    survival of these cells in a dose-dependent manner (Fig. 1A), suggesting the independence of the
                    KRAS status on the antitumor activity of HDACi. In contrast, cetuximab had
                    little effect on the cell viability (Fig. 1A). This result is consistent with the
                    previous study that colorectal cancer cells treated with cetuximab were killed
                    more efficiently by antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC) which is
                    absent in in vitro system [19]. Since EGFR plays a
                    significant role in CRC, the ability of its ligand to trigger the downstream
                    signal in KRAS mutant cells was examined. EGF triggered both Akt and ERK
                    phosphorylation in HCT116 cells and induced ERK activation in SW480 cells (Fig. 1B), indicating that KRAS
                    mutation doesn't fully take over the ligand-mediated ERK activation and
                    also impling the significance of EGFR in KRAS mutant cells. Moreover,
                    pretreatment with HDAC inhibitors, TSA and SAHA, disrupted the EGF-stimulated
                    ERK and Akt phosphorylation in HCT116 cells and ERK phosphorylation in SW480
                    cells (Fig. 1C). Since HDAC
                    inhibitors blocked both Akt and ERK phosphorylations, the very proximal
                    component of EGF signaling might be targeted by HDACi. Therefore, the expression
                    of EGF receptor was firstly examined. After treatment with TSA, the expression
                    of EGFR was decreased in HCT116, SW480, and HT29 cells. To identify whether this
                    is a common phenomenon, cells originated from different organs were used. After
                    treatment with TSA, the reduced EGFR expression was also seen in human skin
                    (A431) and breast (MDA-MB468) cancer cells (Fig.1D).
10.1371/journal.pone.0018087.g001
Figure 1
HDAC inhibitor disrupted the EGF signaling in KRAS mutant colon
                            cancer cells.
(A) HCT116, SW480, WiDr and HT29 cells were maintained in DMEM with 1
                            mg/ml glucose and treated with 0.1, 1, 10 ug/ml cetuximab or 1, 3,
                            5 uM SAHA the cell survival was measured by MTT assay after 48
                            hours treatment (B) HCT116 and SW480 cells were serum-starved for 24
                            hours and then stimulated with 1 uM EGF for, 1, 5, 15, 30 and 60
                            minutes. (C) HCT116 and SW480 cells were pre-incubated with 0.5, 1
                            uM TSA or 5 uM SAHA for 24 hours and then stimulated with
                            EGF for 5 minutes. (D) HCT116, SW480, A431 and MDA-MB468 cells were
                            treated with 1 uM TSA for 24 or 36 hours Whole cell lysate was
                            prepared and subjected to western blot analysis with antibodies specific
                            for phospho-Akt, phosphor-ERK, Akt and Erk.
HDAC inhibitors reduce the expression of SGLT1 and decrease the intracellular
                    glucose
In addition to EGF signaling, EGFR has been reported to be involved in the
                    glucose transport by associating and stabilizing the active glucose transporter,
                    SGLT1 [13],
                        [20].
                    Since the expression of EGFR was reduced by HDACi in CRC cells, the levels of
                    SGLT1 expression and intracellular glucose in response to HDACi were also
                    examined. As expected, TSA reduced the SGLT1 expression (Fig.2A) and the intracellular glucose
                    concentration (Fig. 2B).
                    Glucose replenishment retained the intracellular glucose (Fig. 2C) and rescued cells from the
                    TSA-induced cell death (Fig.
                        2D). These data suggested that the loss of EGFR and its partner,
                    SGLT1, might be involved in the cytotoxic effect of HDAC inhibitors.
10.1371/journal.pone.0018087.g002
Figure 2
HDAC inhibitor reduced the expression of SGLT1 and decreased glucose
                            uptake.
(A) HCT116 cells were treated with 1 uM TSA for 24, 36 or 48 hours.
                            Whole cell lysate were prepared and subjected to western blot analysis
                            with antibodies specific for SGLT1, EGFR and Actin. (B) Cells were
                            cultured in DMEM with 1 mg/ml and treated with 1 uM TSA for 24
                            hours. The glucose content was measured as described in material and method (Triplicate
                            samples were used in each group. The asterisk indicates a significant
                            difference with p<0.05. Error bars indicate mean +- SE.) (C)
                            Cells were cultured in DMEM with 1 mg/ml or 4.5 mg/ml glucose and
                            treated with 1, 3 or 5 uM TSA for 24 hours. The glucose content
                            was measured. (D) Cells were cultured in DMEM with 1 mg/ml glucose and
                            treated with 1 or 3 uM TSA. After 24 or 48 hours of treatment, the
                            glucose was adjusted to 4.5 mg/ml. The cell survival was measured by MTT
                            assay after 72 hours treatment with TSA. Results were expressed as mean
                            +- SE of three independent experiments performed in
                            triplicate.
Loss of EGFR is implicated in HDAC inhibitor-mediated cytotoxicity
HDAC inhibitors are shown to exert antitumor activity by arresting the cell cycle
                    and triggering apoptosis [15]. Consistently, SAHA increased sub-G1 population from
                    7.72% to 17.23% and G2/M population from 16.6% to
                    24.4% (Fig.3A). To
                    elucidate the role of EGFR in the antitumor activity of HDACi, cells were
                    transfected with myc-EGFR and then treated with SAHA for 24 hrs. Overexpression
                    of myc-tagged EGFR decreased the sub-G1 population and G2/M population (Fig.3A). SAHA-induced p21
                    expression was also attenuated by the ectopic expression of EGFR (Fig.3B). These data indicated
                    that SAHA-reduced EGFR expression contributed to the SAHA-induced apoptosis and
                    cell cycle arrest.
10.1371/journal.pone.0018087.g003
Figure 3
Loss of EGFR contributed to HDAC inhibitor-mediated antitumor
                            effects.
(A) HCT116 cells were transfected with Myc-EGFR as well as its vector
                            control and transfected cells were treated with 5 uM SAHA for 24
                            hours. Cells were fixed by 70% ethanol and stained with propidium
                            iodide, and fraction of cell cycle was analyzed by flow cytometer. (B)
                            HCT116 cells were transfected with Myc-EGFR as well as its vector
                            control and the transfected cells were treated with 5 uM SAHA for
                            24 hours. Whole cell lysate were prepared and subjected to western blot
                            using Ab specific for EGFR, Myc, p21 and tubulin.
HDACs are implicated in the transcription of EGFR
Since the amount of EGFR protein is reduced after treatment with HDACi, the EGFR
                    gene transcription was examined. The mRNA level of EGFR was decreased
                    dramatically after treatment with TSA and SAHA (Fig.4A), suggesting HDACi transcriptionally
                    downregulate EGFR expression. This effect was further confirmed by EGFR reporter
                    assays. Our result showed that TSA and SAHA significantly decreased the EGFR
                    promoter activity (Fig.4B
                    upper panel). It has been reported that HDACi decreased the EGFR mRNA stability
                    in ER-negative human breast cancer cells [21]. Therefore, the stability of
                    EGFR mRNA was examined. The de novo transcription was stopped
                    by actinomycin D and the EGFR mRNA was measured by real-time PCR. The slope of
                    EGFR mRNA degradation didn't show a significant difference between basal
                    and TSA treatment (Fig. 4B
                    lower panel), suggesting that HDACi didn't affect the degradation of EGFR
                    mRNA in colorectal cancer cells. To further elucidate the involvement of HDACs
                    in the transcription of EGFR, myc-tagged HDAC1, HDAC2 or HDAC3 was ectopically
                    expressed in HCT116 cells, and EGFR mRNA was measured by RT-PCR. An increase of
                    EGFR mRNA was found in all these HDAC-expressing cells (Fig. 4C upper panel). Conversely, knockdown
                    of HDAC1, HDAC2 or HDAC3 by shRNA reduced the expression of EGFR protein (Fig.4C lower panel). These
                    data indicated that class I HDACs are crucial for EGFR expression. The positive
                    correlation between EGFR and HDAC3 expression was also observed in fourteen
                    pairs of human colon tumor and adjacent normal tissues (Fig. 4D).
10.1371/journal.pone.0018087.g004
Figure 4
HDAC is involved in the regulation of EGFR transcription.
(A) HCT116 cells were treated with 1 uM TSA or 5 uM SAHA for
                            1 and 8 hours. Total RNA (2 ug) was used for RT-PCR and Real-time
                            PCR as described. (B, upper panel) Cells were treated with 1 uM
                            TSA or 5 uM SAHA for 6 hour, then transfected with EGFR-Luc.
                            Luciferase activities were measured as described under "Material and Method". (B, lower
                            panel) Cells were treated with 1 uM TSA for 4 h before RNA
                            synthesis was stopped by actinomycin D (5 ug/ml) for 0, 2, 4 or 6
                            h. RNA was prepared at indicated time points following the addition of
                            actinomycin D and levels of EGFR mRNA were measured by real-time PCR.
                            (C, upper panel) Cells were transiently transfected with Myc-tagged
                            HDAC1, 2 or 3, respectively and total RNA (2 ug) was used for
                            RT-PCR to detect the EGFR mRNA level. (C, lower panel) Cells were
                            transfected with shLuc, shHDAC1, shHDAC2 or shHDAC3 by lentivirus as
                            described under "Material and
                                Method". Cell lysates were harvested on day 5 after
                            transfection and then subjected to western blot analysis with antibodies
                            specific for EGFR, HDAC1, HDAC2 and HDAC3. (D) Lysates of paired human
                            normal and malignant colon tissues were subjected to western blotting
                            using anti-EGFR, anti-HDAC3 and anti-Actin antibodies. The correlation
                            between EGFR and HDAC3 expression levels was evaluated by correlation
                            coefficients.
SP1 is essential for EGFR transcription and HDAC inhibitor disturbs the
                    binding of SP1 to EGFR promoter
There are several SP1 binding sites on the EGFR promoters and our previous
                    studies showed that HDACi affects the binding of SP1 to ADAMTS1or p21 promoters
                        [22], [23]. Therefore,
                    SP1 may participate in the HDACs-mediated EGFR expression. Indeed, inhibition of
                    SP1 by mithramycin A (MTM) and siRNA significantly decreased the EGFR expression
                        (Fig.5A). Furthermore,
                    MTM drastically reduced the EGFR promoter activity (Fig.5B), indicating the critical role of SP1
                    in EGFR gene transcription. The binding of SP1 to the EGFR promoter is further
                    examined by chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP). Five primer pairs (A, B, C, D
                    and E) were designed to evenly cover the regions (-1,200 to +1,000
                    bps) around transcription start site (Fig.6A). Our data showed that the binding of
                    SP1 to regions C and D was significantly decreased after treatment with SAHA
                        (Fig.6B). Furthermore,
                    the acetylation of Histone H3 and H4 on EGFR promoter was largely reduced,
                    especially in the regions nearby transcription start site (Fig.6B). The status of histone methylation
                    such as H3K4Me2, H3K9Me3 and H3K27Me3 was also examined. SAHA didn't
                    change the residence of these methylation markers on EGFR promoter despite of
                    enriched H3K4Me2 was found (Fig.6B and data not shown). Since the acetylation of histone H3 and
                    H4 dropped dramatically after HDAC inhibition, the occupancy of histone
                    acetyltransferase (HAT) or HDAC on EGFR promoter was examined. Our result showed
                    that the recruitment of CBP to region D was significantly decreased by SAHA
                        (Fig.6B). Interestingly,
                    the binding of HDAC3 to the region D was attenuated, too (Fig.6B). These data showed the dissociation
                    of SP1, CBP and HDAC3 from EGFR promoter at the same time (Fig.7), implying that these proteins may
                    influence each other and affect their binding to the EGFR promoter.
10.1371/journal.pone.0018087.g005
Figure 5
SP1 is essential for the EGFR transcription.
(A) Cells were treated with 1 uM Mithramycin A (MTM) for 18 or 36
                            hours, then the total cell lysate were prepared. Cells were transfected
                            with 0, 400 or 800 pmole SP1 siRNA, then the total cell lysates were
                            prepared and subjected to western blot analysis with antibodies specific
                            for EGFR and SP1. (B) Cells were transfected with EGFR-Luc and then
                            treated with 0.1, 1 or 5 uM Mithramycin A (MTM) for 16 hours.
                            Luciferase activities were measured as described under "Material and Method". The
                            results were normalized to the Renilla luciferase activity and expressed
                            as the mean +- SE. For three independent experiments performed in
                            triplicate.
10.1371/journal.pone.0018087.g006
Figure 6
The epigenetic alteration on EGFR promoter.
(A) Illustration of the EGFR promoter and the ChIP primer. (B) Cells were
                            treated with SAHA for 8 hours, then fixed, sonicated and subjected to
                            Chromatin Immunoprecipitation using Ab specific against SP1 and
                            acetylated histone H3. Histone H4 acetylation H3K4 dimethylation, CBP
                            and HDAC3 on EGFR promoter was measured by ChIP assays as described
                            under "Material and
                            Method".
10.1371/journal.pone.0018087.g007
Figure 7
Schematic diagram of EGFR promoter in the basal state or treatement
                            with HDACi.
In the basal state, HDAC3, CBP and SP1 were both recruited to the
                            promoter region and responsible for the transcription of EGFR (A). While
                            treated with HDACi, the complex of HDAC3, CBP and SP1 were disrupted and
                            dispersed from EGFR promoter, leading to the inactivation of EGFR
                            transcription (B).

Discussion
EGFR and HDAC have been reported to be overexpressed in colorectal and various
                cancers [1],
                    [15]. However,
                their relationship is not well-characterized. In this study, we showed that HDAC
                inhibitors (HDACi) were able to disrupt the EGF-signaling in colon cancer cells.
                EGFR expression in these cells as well as other origins such as epidermoid (A431)
                and breast (MDA-MB468) was decreased by HDACi, suggesting the potential of HDACi to
                treat EGFR overexpressing cancers. HDACi also reduced the expression of an active
                glucose transporter, SGLT1, and thereby suppressed the glucose uptake of colon
                cancer cells. More in-depth, we showed that SAHA induced the dissociation of
                SP1/CBP/HDAC3 from the regions around EGFR transcription start site where the
                histones became hypoacetylated. Our data indicated that the HDAC inhibitors could
                serve as a single agent to block EGFR and HDAC, two critical factors in CRC cells,
                and may provide a more effective therapy for a broader range of indication.
Most solid tumors reside in a hypoxic environment and prefer the anaerobic glycolysis
                rather than aerobic glycolysis, converting glucose to lactate and produce fewer ATP
                with less oxygen consumption. Therefore, the glucose uptake is frequently enhanced
                in tumors by overexpression of glucose transporters, such as GLUT1 and SGLT1 [24]. Unlike
                GLUT1 that transports glucose passively, SGLT1 uses the electro-chemical sodium
                gradient to transport glucose against the internal concentration gradient. SGLT1 is
                expressed in human colon cancers, pancreatic cancer, lung cancer and neoplastic
                lesions of head and neck [25]-[29]. It is found to be stabilized by EGFR, and knockdown of
                EGFR decreases the SGLT1 expression and glucose uptake [13]. Our data also showed that
                HDACi-mediated loss of EGFR, and the concurrent reduction of SGLT1 expression and
                glucose uptake would eliminate the overall pro-survival functions of EGFR.
Several studies show the inhibitory effect of HDACi on EGFR expression in human
                cancers. For example, FK-228, a depsipeptide HDAC inhibitor, is reported to decrease
                the expression of EGFR in lung cancer cells [30]. SAHA decreases the levels of EGFR
                in ER-negative breast cancer cells via mRNA destabilzaiton [21]. More recently, inhibition of
                HDAC6 is found to enhance the endocytosis of EGFR through increasing tubulin
                acetylation [31],
                    [32]. In this
                study, we demonstrated that both EGFR mRNA and its promoter activity were inhibited
                by HDAC inhibitors in colon cancer cells, indicating that the de
                    novo synthesis of EGFR was transcriptionally inhibited. EGFR promoter
                is characterized with GC-rich, and TATA-less, and harbors multiple specificity
                protein 1 (Sp1) binding sites [33]. In addition to SP1, several transcription factors, such
                as AP-1, p53 and c-Jun, also participate in the EGFR transcription [34]. SP1 has been
                reported to regulate the basal EGFR promoter activity [35]. We showed that inhibition or
                knockdown of SP1 could decrease the promoter activity and protein expression of
                EGFR, emphasizing its crucial role in EGFR expression.
SP1 has been reported to be regulated by several post-translational modifications,
                including phosphorylation, acetylation, ubiquitination and sumoylation [36]. It is acetylated
                by p300 and deacetylated by HDAC [37]. Although acetylated SP1 could increase the transcription
                of GC-box-dependent genes [37], accumulating data also show that acetylation of SP1
                decrease the its transcriptional activity. For example, SP1 acetylation by HDACi
                reduces its ability to regulate 12(s)-lipooxygenase (12S-LOX) expression. Ectopic
                expression of SP1 mutant, which cannot be acetylated at lysine 703, increases
                12S-LOX transcription, and deacetylation of SP1 is also required for the
                transcription of COX-2 [38], [39]. Our previous studies show that HDACi affects the binding
                of SP1 to ADAMTS1 promoter and the association of SP1 and CBP on p21 promoter [22], [23]. SP1 on EGFR
                promoter might be affected by HDACi as well. Indeed, SP1 was dissociated from EGFR
                promoter after treatment with HDACi, implying that acetylation may decrease the
                binding of SP1 to the EGFR promoter. Surprisingly, the histones on EGFR promoter
                became hypoacetylated. This could be explained by the concurrent dissociation of
                CBP, the histone acetyltransferase (HAT).
HDACi is reported to induce G2/M growth arrest as well as G0/G1 arrest in colorectal
                cancer cells, and the HDACi-mediated growth arrest consistently involves p21
                induction [40]-[43]. In HCT116 cells, p21 is induced and the cell cycle is
                arrested in G2/M phase by silencing class I HDACs, especially HDAC3 [17]. Consistently,
                we found that SAHA induced p21 and G2/M arrest and re-expression of EGFR could
                alleviate these events. HDAC3 has been reported to be maximally expressed in the
                proliferative compartment in mouse colon. Knockdown of HDAC3 induced a greater
                magnitude of G2/M and S phase arrest than that of HDAC1/2, suggesting that HDAC3 is
                more significant than HDAC1/2 in colon cell proliferation [17]. HDAC3 is a component of the
                NCoR-SMRT co-repressor complex, which is distinct from repressor complexes
                containing HDAC1 and HDAC2 (Sin3A and NuRD) [44], indicating the specific roles
                of HDAC isoform in gene repressing. In contrast, knockdown of HDAC1, 2 or 3
                decreased the EGFR expression in varying degree, indicating that they share
                functional redundancy on promoting EGFR transcription. Ectopic express HDAC3 induced
                a greater magnitude of EGFR mRNA and a positive correlation between EGFR and HDAC3
                expression in colon cancer patients. Therefore, HDAC3 may be most essential in EGFR
                transcription.
Association of HDACs with gene promoters are traditionally considered to repress
                transcription and HDAC is thought to reactivate the silenced genes [45]. However, HDACi
                is also reported to decrease the expression of thymidylate synthase, vascular
                endothelial growth factor (VEGF), basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) and
                endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) [46]-[48]. It is suggested that gene
                transcription primed by H3K4 methylation requires the dynamic cycle of histone
                acetylation and deacetylation by transient HAT/HDAC binding [49]. In this study, we found that
                EGFR promoter was enriched with H3K4 di-methylation, suggesting that EGFR gene
                transcription may be primed by H3K4 methylation. HDAC3 and CBP were both associated
                with EGFR promoter and concurrently dissociated after treatment with HDACi, implying
                that dynamic HAT/HDAC binding is occurred. Since CBP and HDAC3 are unable to
                directly bind gene promoter, SP1 may serve as a bridge between CBP/HDAC3 and EGFR
                promoter (Fig. 6A). HDACi may
                induce SP1 acetylation and leads to its dissociation from EGFR promoter, which
                disrupts the dynamic binding of HDAC3 and CBP (Fig. 6B). Taken together, our results showed that
                the SP1, HDAC3 and CBP were all dissociated from EGFR promoter after SAHA treatment,
                suggesting their functional relevance on EGFR transcription.
It has been reported that HDAC inhibitors synergize with 5-FU in
                    vitro and in vivo to treat colon cancer through
                downregulation of thymidylate synthase, the 5-FU target enzyme [46]. Combination of 5-FU with SAHA
                has recently entered phase I/II trial to treat CRC [18], [50]. Inhibition of MAPK and Akt
                signaling by AEE788, a multiple receptor tyrosine kinases inhibitor, synergistically
                potentiates HDAC-induced apoptosis in a broad spectrum of cancer cell lines [51]. Recently, a new
                compound, CUDC-101, which inhibit the activity of both EGFR and HDAC, is
                demonstrated to have powerful anticancer activity [52]. These reports strengthen the
                rationale of concurrent inhibition of EGFR and HDAC in cancer therapy. In this
                study, we showed that HDAC inhibitor alone is able to block EGFR transcription as
                well as HDAC, and may provide a hint for superior strategy of colorectal cancer
                therapy.
