[Abstract, Results, Discussion, Methods]

PTEN-regulated AKT/FoxO3a/Bim signaling contributes to reactive oxygen species-mediated apoptosis in selenite-treated colorectal cancer cells. Mounting evidence shows that selenium possesses chemotherapeutic potential against tumor cells, including leukemia, prostate cancer and colorectal cancer (CRC) cells. However, the detailed mechanism by which sodium selenite specifically kills tumor cells remains unclear. Herein, we demonstrated that supranutritional doses of selenite-induced apoptosis in CRC cells through reactive oxygen species (ROS)-dependent modulation of the PI3K/AKT/FoxO3a signaling pathway. First, we found that selenite treatment in HCT116 and SW480 CRC cells caused inhibition of AKT and the nuclear accumulation of FoxO3a by western blot and immunofluorescence analyses, respectively, thereby facilitating transcription of the target genes bim and PTEN. Modulation of the AKT/FoxO3a/Bim signaling pathway by chemical inhibitors or RNA interference revealed that these events were critical for selenite-induced apoptosis in CRC cells. Additionally, we discovered that FoxO3a-mediated upregulation of PTEN exerted a further inhibitory effect on the AKT survival pathway. We also corroborated our findings in vivo by performing immunohistochemistry experiments. In summary, our results show that selenite could induce ROS-dependent FoxO3a-mediated apoptosis in CRC cells and xenograft tumors through PTEN-mediated inhibition of the PI3K/AKT survival axis. These results help to elucidate the molecular mechanisms underlying selenite-induced cell death in tumor cells and provide a theoretical basis for translational applications of selenium.

Results
Selenite-induced apoptosis is associated with the Src/PI3K/AKT/FoxO3a signaling axis
Following our previous study showing that supranutritional doses of selenite induced apoptosis in CRC cells, we aimed to elucidate the underlying molecular mechanisms. Thus, we conducted experiments to investigate whether selenite could influence the AKT survival pathway in CRC cells. As shown in Figure 1a, we found that supranutritional doses of selenite time-dependently inhibited the Src/PI3K/PDK1/AKT survival pathway in both HCT116 and SW480 CRC cells. Additionally, in vitro PI3K and AKT assays (Figure 1b; Supplementary Figure S1) showed that selenite treatment inhibited AKT and PI3K activation in HCT116 and SW480 CRC cells. We therefore postulated that FoxO family proteins may be regulated by selenite-inhibited AKT. To test this hypothesis, we immunoblotted FoxO family proteins in selenite-treated samples and found that selenite consistently suppressed the phosphorylation of these proteins (Figure 1c), indicating that FoxO proteins may be activated when AKT is inhibited by selenite. To further corroborate this finding, we extracted cytoplasmic and nuclear fractions from cells and immunoblotted for FoxO3a and p-Foxo3a in both control and selenite-treated samples and discovered that selenite increased the nuclear levels of FoxO3a but decreased its levels of phosphorylation (Figure 1d). Furthermore, immunofluorescence results (Figure 1e) also supported the above conclusion that selenite induced FoxO3a accumulation in the nucleus. Taken together, these results indicated that selenite inhibited Src/PI3K/PDK1/AKT signaling and activated FoxO family proteins in HCT116 and SW480 CRC cells.
AKT/FoxO3a signaling is correlated with selenite-induced apoptosis in CRC cells
Having discovered that selenite treatment inhibited Src/PI3K/PDK1/AKT signaling and activated FoxO proteins, we conducted a series of experiments to investigate the relationship between AKT and FoxO3a in selenite-induced apoptosis in CRC cells. On one hand, as revealed in Figures 2a and b, when AKT was inhibited in selenite-treated CRC cells with either the PI3K inhibitor LY294002 or AKT siRNA, we found that both treatments further decreased the p-AKT level. As expected, inhibiting AKT further suppressed the phosphorylation of FoxO3a at Ser253 even with selenite treatment. Conversely, when we activated AKT in CRC cells using constitutively activated AKT constructs prior to selenite treatment, we found that, consistent with our hypothesis, constitutively activated AKT increased phosphorylation of AKT and FoxO3a and selenite could no longer reduce phosphorylation of AKT and consequently phosphorylation of FoxO3a (Figure 2c). These results collectively showed that selenite-elicited inhibition of AKT was associated with the activation of FoxO3a. Subsequently, we attempted to determine the role of AKT/FoxO3a in selenite-induced apoptosis of CRC cells. First, from western blot results of the above-mentioned samples, we observed that reactivation of AKT resulted in less cleavage of apoptosis-related markers such as caspase 9 and PARP, whereas further inhibition of AKT led to additional cleavage of these apoptosis-related markers. Analysis of the apoptotic rate by FACS using cells treated as indicated in the panels of Figures 2d and e and Supplementary Figures S2A and B demonstrated that AKT reactivation or inhibition could blunt or enhance, respectively, the apoptosis of CRC cells treated with selenite. Complementary to the above results, silencing FoxO3a with siRNA specifically decreased the level of apoptosis in selenite-treated CRC cells, as revealed by western blotting and FACS (Figures 2f and g; Supplementary Figure S2C). Thus, these findings clearly demonstrate that selenite induced apoptosis in CRC cells through regulation of the AKT/FoxO3a pathway.
Bim acts as a pivotal downstream factor of FoxO3a and thereby contributes to apoptosis
Accumulated FoxO3a in the nucleus can bind to promoters containing a consensus sequence to enhance the transcription of various molecules involved in apoptosis and the cell cycle, such as bim, puma, p27 and p21.21 Our previous results showed that Bcl-2 family proteins are critical regulators of selenite-induced apoptosis.22 Thus, we performed chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) experiments to examine whether selenite could influence the binding of FoxO3a to the bim promoter to drive bim transcription. Indeed, as shown in Figure 3a, selenite treatment in HCT116 and SW480 CRC cells enhanced FoxO3a binding to the bim promoter, thus enhancing its transcription (Figure 3b). Accordingly, western blot results also showed that selenite treatment enhanced the expression of bim (Figure 3c). To explore whether Bim participated in selenite-induced apoptosis in CRC cells, we separated mitochondrial and cytoplasmic fractions from selenite-treated cells, immunoblotted for Bim and found that selenite treatment could induce the translocation of Bim from the cytoplasm to the mitochondria (Figure 3d). Moreover, immunostaining for Bim in HCT116 and SW480 CRC cells also corroborated the finding that selenite induced the colocalization of Bim with the mitochondria (Figure 3e). Finally, to further confirm the role of Bim in apoptosis, we knocked down the expression of Bim with siRNA in cells treated with selenite and found that Bim silencing markedly blocked selenite-induced apoptosis in HCT116 and SW480 CRC cells, as demonstrated by western blotting and FACS. (Figures 3f and g; Supplementary Figure S3).
FoxO3a-upregulated PTEN expression is involved in regulating selenite-induced changes in the AKT/FoxO3a/Bim signaling pathway
In our experiments, we unexpectedly found that selenite-induced FoxO3a also binds to the promoter of the PTEN gene (Figure 4a) in HCT116 and SW480 CRC cells, a finding also mentioned by Chiacchiera et al.23 Further experiments indicated that FoxO3a directly facilitated PTEN transcription rather than blocking its degradation, as an mRNA synthesis inhibitor clearly inhibited the increase in PTEN mRNA after selenite treatment (Figure 4b). Moreover, the expression of PTEN also increased in a time-dependent manner after selenite treatment (Figure 4c). PTEN activity in selenite-treated cells was also enhanced in both cell lines (Figure 4d). To clarify whether upregulation of PTEN could indeed affect the AKT/FoxO3a signaling pathway, we knocked down PTEN expression or transfected cells with a phosphatase-dead (C124S) mutant. As shown in Figures 4e and f, PTEN knockdown reversed the changes elicited by selenite in both cell lines. In addition, the inhibition of PTEN by SF167024 abrogated the changes in the AKT/FoxO3a/Bim pathway induced by upregulated PTEN (Figure 4g). From these results, we concluded that selenite-induced inhibition of AKT and the activation of FoxO3a/Bim as well as apoptosis were critically regulated by increased levels of PTEN.
Selenite-induced ROS are indispensable for AKT/FOXO3a/Bim-mediated apoptosis in CRC cells
Previous work, including our own, has identified ROS as an important factor in the induction of apoptosis in cancer cells.25, 26, 27 Our previous work showed that sodium selenite treatment could induce an increased level of ROS in CRC cells.9 Thus, we conducted experiments to elucidate whether ROS were involved in selenite-induced apoptosis in CRC cells. To explore the possible link between ROS and AKT/FOXO3a/Bim-mediated apoptosis, we eliminated ROS in selenite-treated cells using a MnSOD mimic, the widely used ROS scavenger MnTMPyP or another ROS extinguisher (Tiron) and found that depletion of ROS almost completely blocked apoptosis induced by selenite, as observed by the disappearance of cleaved PARP. Furthermore, this signaling pathway regulated by selenite that was also relieved by ROS depletion strongly argues for a role of ROS in selenite-induced AKT/FOXO3a/Bim-mediated apoptosis in CRC cells (Figure 5a).
The PTEN/AKT/FoxO3a/Bim signaling pathway is regulated by selenite in vivo
Having defined the role of PTEN/AKT/FoxO3a/Bim signaling in selenite-induced apoptosis in CRC cells, we sought to test whether selenite could regulate this signaling pathway in vivo. We previously observed that selenite treatment could markedly inhibit tumor growth and induce apoptosis in a SW480 colon xenograft model.8 To verify these results in additional tissues, we first performed western blot analysis of tissues from both control and selenite-treated samples, and the results revealed that selenite could inhibit the phosphorylation of PI3K/PDK1/AKT and FoxO3a, thereby upregulating Bim and PTEN (Figure 5b). Additionally, in a series of immunohistochemistry experiments, we examined the expression patterns of critical molecules in this signaling pathway, including p-AKT, AKT, FoxO3a, p-FoxO3a, Bim and PTEN, and discovered that each of these proteins displayed a similar pattern as that seen in tumor cell lines (Figure 5c; Supplementary Figure S5).

Discussion
The present study presents evidence that the AKT/FoxO3a/Bim/PTEN signaling axis is closely associated with selenite-induced apoptosis in CRC cells and xenograft tumors. A model depicting our findings is shown in Figure 6. Together, our results suggest that supranutritional doses of selenite inhibit Src/PI3K/PDK1/AKT signaling and activate FoxO proteins. Further experiments revealed that inhibiting or activating AKT genetically or pharmacologically together with selenite treatment resulted in the further regulation of FoxO3a as well as its target bim. We also confirmed that selenite-induced activation of FoxO3a could enhance the transcription of bim and PTEN via increased promoter binding of FoxO3a. Enhanced levels of bim were further shown to translocate from the cytoplasm to mitochondria, which played a crucial role in the activation of caspase 9 and PARP resulting from selenite treatment. Furthermore, we found that FoxO3a-induced PTEN played a role in the selenite-regulated AKT/FoxO3a/Bim signaling pathway, further amplifying the proapoptotic effect of selenite. Moreover, depletion of ROS via treatment with MnTmPyP or Tiron in selenite-induced cells reversed the changes observed in the AKT/FoxO3a/Bim signaling pathway, implying that ROS may be involved in selenite-induced regulation of the AKT/FoxO3a/Bim signaling pathway in HCT116 and SW480 CRC cells.
FoxO family proteins have emerged as master regulators that control a plethora of cellular activities through the orchestration of different patterns of gene expression in response to diverse stimuli.28 Notably, studies by the group of David T Scadden revealed a role for FoxO3a in maintaining a differentiation blockade in AML cells,29 which is in contrast to its canonical tumor suppressor role. Furthermore, these cells could be regulated by many upstream factors such as AKT, ERK, IKKb and JNK under different contexts.30, 31, 32, 33 In the present study, we focused on the effect of AKT on FoxO3a and its downstream targets because AKT was shown to be aberrantly expressed in multiple malignant tumors, particularly in CRC. Thus, exploring the molecular mechanisms of drugs targeting AKT could be of great significance for treating cancer, particularly for tumors harboring aberrantly upregulated AKT activity. First, we found that selenite inhibited AKT and its canonical upstream regulator PI3K and PDK1. We demonstrated that AKT inhibition directly activated FoxO3a in response to selenite, an event crucial for selenite-induced apoptosis. The AKT/FoxO3a signaling hub has also been shown to be regulated by many other chemotherapy drugs, such as 18b-glycyrrhetinic acid, isoflavone and paclitaxel.34, 35, 36 FoxO3a is phosphorylated by AKT at Thr32, Ser256 and Ser319, and phosphorylation of these amino acids provides binding sites for 14-3-3 proteins, resulting in the retention of FoxO3a by 14-3-3 in the cytoplasm. Accordingly, selenite treatment drastically decreased 14-3-3 binding sites on FoxO3a proteins, indicating that FoxO3a was retained in the nucleus (Supplementary Figure S2D). Furthermore, inhibition of AKT by selenite was shown to be directly related to the reduced phosphorylation of FoxO3a (Figures 2a and b), which resulted in FoxO3a accumulation in the nucleus. This prompted us to further investigate the role of FoxO3a in the nucleus following treatment with selenite in CRC cells.
Bim is widely known for its pro-apoptotic functions in mitochondria, and it induces apoptosis by interacting with proteins harboring anti-apoptotic function such as Bcl-xL and Bcl-2. Such interactions release proteins, including Bax and Bak, at the mitochondria to initiate apoptosis.37, 38 Bim was also shown to be a direct target of FoxO3a.39 In the present study, we found that activated FoxO3a could bind more intensely to the promoter of bim, thereby facilitating bim transcription. In parallel, an increased Bim level was correlated with translocation from the cytoplasm to the mitochondria, and knockdown experiments showed that selenite-induced bim expression was involved in selenite-induced apoptosis.
PTEN is commonly mutated in various cancers,40, 41 as it normally functions as a tumor suppressor to antagonize the effects of PI3K through its lipid phosphatase activity. Consequently, AKT activation is balanced by both PTEN and PI3K. In the present study, we observed that selenite inhibited the phosphorylation of Src and the p85 subunit of PI3K and its downstream effectors PDK1 and AKT. Additionally, PTEN expression was upregulated by FoxO3a and (Figures 2f and 4c), and PTEN activity was enhanced in response to selenite treatment (Figure 4d). These findings are supported by work from Meuillet and coworkers.42 Therefore, we hypothesized that selenite-induced activation of PTEN was involved in regulation of the AKT/FoxO3a/Bim signaling pathway. We transfected cells with lipid phosphatase-dead PTEN plasmids or PTEN siRNA as well as inhibiting PTEN with SF1670 and discovered that selenite-mediated modulation of the AKT/FoxO3a/Bim pathway was abrogated when PTEN was inhibited. Furthermore, activating PTEN with NaBT in HCT116 and SW480 CRC cells exerted further inhibitory effects on the AKT/FoxO3a/Bim signaling pathway (Supplementary Figure S4). We concluded that selenite-induced PTEN was associated with the AKT/FoxO3a/Bim pathway and apoptosis in HCT116 and SW480 CRC cells, which is consistent with the findings from other groups showing that PTEN directly regulates AKT/FoxO3a under various circumstances.43, 44 However, whether a positive feedback loop exists between PTEN and the AKT/FoxO/Bim signaling pathway requires further study.
Our previous results, along with the findings of other studies, have implicated ROS as a potential mediator of selenite-induced apoptosis and its related signaling pathway in tumor cells.5, 7, 9 To define the role of selenite-induced ROS in the AKT/FoxO3a/Bim signaling pathway, we inhibited selenite-induced ROS in CRC cells and observed that the above change in the AKT/FoxO3a/Bim pathway was blocked completely. Additionally, selenite-induced apoptosis was blunted when cells were pretreated with ROS scavengers. Thus, the selenite-regulated PTEN/AKT/FoxO3a/Bim signaling hub and apoptosis are critically modulated by ROS in HCT116 and SW480 cells. However, much work still needs to be done to clarify the relationship between ROS and selenite-modulated FoxO proteins, as work by Schulze coworkers45 found that FoxO proteins could reduce the ROS level in cells by impairing the expression of genes with mitochondrial function rather than in the canonical SOD2-independent manner. Moreover, work by Yoon et al.46 concluded that selenite inhibits apoptosis through activation of PI3K/AKT signaling, and Xiangjia Zhu together with his colleagues discovered that selenite inhibits 1,2-dihydroxynaphthalene-induced apoptosis in human lens epithelial cells through activation of the PI3K/Akt pathway.47 However, it should be noted that the concentration of selenite used in these previous studies was very low (2-3 mmol/l) and was a physiological dose that caused different effects regarding cell survival and the PI3K/Akt signaling pathway. Our previous study also provided evidence that low-dose selenite could promote cell survival, whereas supranutritional doses of selenite could induce apoptosis in CRC cells.48 The effects of selenite on cell fate and regulation of this signaling axis depend on the doses and different cellular systems, which also applies to in vivo experiments. Although we used a colon xenograft model to strengthen our findings, we paid much attention to the heterogeneity of cancer cells when reaching our conclusion. Thus, much work needs to be done to define the role of selenite in vivo, which is a main focus of our future research.
In summary, the ensemble of evidence presented in the current study demonstrates that sodium selenite could induce apoptosis specifically in CRC cells by inhibiting Src/PI3K/AKT survival factors and activating FoxO proteins along with the targets bim and PTEN. Activated FoxO3a bound more intensely to the Bim and PTEN promoters, thereby enhancing their transcription and expression, and our immunofluorescence and western blot results both demonstrated that increased levels of Bim translocated from the cytoplasm to the mitochondria. Furthermore, RNA interference experiments revealed that this process was essential for selenite-induced apoptosis. Selenite-induced PTEN further amplified this effect on the AKT/FoxO3a/Bim signaling pathway. However, whether selenite can directly affect PTEN activity through somehow mechanisms warrants further study. These findings help to elucidate the molecular effects of selenite treatment and provide a theoretical basis for its clinical application, and exploration of the detailed molecular mechanisms underlying the efficacy of selenite in treating malignant cancer is of great significance for translational medicine.

Materials and Methods
Cell lines and culture
The human CRC cell lines HCT116 and SW480 were purchased from the cell culture center of the Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and maintained in DMEM (Invitrogen, Paisley, Scotland) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS; Hyclone, Logan, UT, USA), 100 units/ml penicillin and 100 mg/ml streptomycin in a humidified 5% CO2 atmosphere at 37 degC. All cell cultures were monitored routinely, all cell lines were discarded after 2 months, and new lines were propagated from the frozen stocks.
Reagents and antibodies
Sodium selenite, Tiron, NaBT and SF1670 were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA). A 10 mmol/l stock solution of selenite was prepared by dissolving selenite powder in sterile PBS solution, and a final 10 mmol/l working solution was used in the current study (as determined previously). LY294002 was obtained from Promega (Madison, WI, USA). Manganese (III) tetrakis (1-methyl-4-pyridyl) porphyrin (MnTMPyP) was purchased from Merck Calbiochem (San Diego, CA, USA). Insulin was purchased from Roche (Auckland, NZ, USA). Actinomycin D and DAPI were purchased from Beyotime (Haimen, Jiangsu, China).
The antibody against b-actin was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Antibodies recognizing cleaved caspase 9, cleaved PARP, p-Src (Tyr416), Src, p-p85 (Tyr458), p85, p-PDK1 (Ser241), PDK1, p-AKT(Thr308), AKT, p-FoxO1 (Ser256), FoxO1, p-FoxO4 (Ser193), FoxO4, the Pho-(Ser) 14-3-3 binding motif, PTEN, Bim, p-PTEN(Ser380), Myc-tag, VDAC and HA-tag were purchased from Cell Signaling Technology (Beverly, MA, USA). Antibodies against B23, FoxO3a and p-FoxO3a (Ser253) were obtained from Santa Cruz (Santa Cruz, CA, USA).
Immunoblotting
To prepare lysates, cells were collected after trypsinization and washed twice with cold PBS. Total cell lysates were prepared in RIPA buffer (20 mM Tris (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, 1% Triton X-100, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM b-glycerophosphate, 1 mM Na3VO4, 1 mg/ml leupeptin and 1 mM PMSF). Specifically, nuclear fractions were obtained using the NE-PER nuclear/cytoplasmic extraction kit. Mitochondria were fractionated using the Mitochondria Isolation Kit for Mammalian Cells (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA). The protein concentration in each sample was determined using the Bradford assay. After normalization, equal amounts of proteins were fractionated on 8-15% SDS-PAGE gels. The proteins were then transferred to nitrocellulose membranes (GE Healthcare, Little Chalfont, Buckinghamshire, UK) and incubated with the indicated primary antibodies and corresponding HRP-conjugated secondary antibodies. The immunoreactive bands were visualized by chemiluminescence according to the manufacturer's recommendations (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA, USA).
Plasmids transient transfection analysis
Approximately 4 x 105 cells were plated into six-well plate 1 day before transfection experiments to allow for cell attachment and growth. When grown to 50% confluency, cells were transfected with indicated plasmids by lipofectamine 2000 reagent (Invitrogen), according to the protocol. Briefly, about 4 mg plasmids were transfected into cells together with 5 ml lipofectamine 2000 reagent per well. At 24 h after transfection, cells were treated as indicated.
Small interfering RNAs
AKT1 siRNA (5'-AAGGAGGGUUGGCUGCACAAA-3'); FOXO3a siRNA (5'-AAUGUGACA-UGGAGUCCAUUA-3'); Bim siRNA (5'-AAGGUAGACAAUUGCAGCCUG-3'); PTEN si RNA (5'-GACUUGAAGGCGUAUACAGtt-3') and the control siRNA (5'-UUCUCCGAACGUGUCA-CGUTT3') were chemically synthesized by GenePharm (Shanghai, China). Cells cultured in six-well plates were transfected with 100 pM siRNA by lipofectamine 2000 according to the guideline as described above. Cells were then subjected to further treatment as demanded.
Co-immunoprecipitation
Cells were harvested and total cell lysates were prepared in RIPA buffer. In all, 200 mg aliquots of lysates were immunoprecipitated by the appropriate antibodies and normal immunoglobulin antibodies as a control. The immunoprecipitates were then captured by 25 ml protein A+G agarose beads (Santa Cruz). After being washed and elutioned, the immunoprecipitates were subjected to western blot assays.
PI3K kinase assay
The in vitro kinase activity of PI3K in our study was examined using the PI3-Kinase Activity Assay Kit from Echelon Biosciences (Salt Lake, UT, USA). Briefly, cells were treated as indicated, and then PI3K was immunoprecipitated from cellular lysates using PI3K antibodies. Kinase reactions were performed using PI2P as the substrate. The production of PI3P in each sample was detected using ELISA, according to the methods provided by the manufacturer. The relative activity of PI3K could be calculated based on the concentration of PI3P in each group.
AKT kinase assay
The in vitro kinase activity of AKT kinase in cells treated with or without selenite was determined using the Akt Kinase Assay Kit (Cell Signaling Technology). Briefly, cells were harvested, and cell lysates were prepared in cell lysis buffer provided by the manufacturer. Subsequently, immobilized Akt antibody was used to immunoprecipitate p-AKT from cell lysates followed by in vitro detection of Akt kinase activity using GSK-3 fusion protein and cold ATP in the kinase buffer. Finally, the activity of AKT kinase in each sample was determined according to GSK-3a/b phosphorylation by western blotting.
In vitro phosphatase activity assay of PTEN
The phosphatase activity of PTEN was determined using the Malachite Green Assay Kit from Echelon Biosciences. Briefly, PTEN was immunoprecipitated from treated cells using PTEN monoclonal antibodies. After thorough washing and purification, the immunocomplexes were dissolved in the enzyme reaction buffer. The enzyme reaction was initiated using the PIP3 substrate provided by the manufacturer. Malachite green solution was added at the termination of the enzyme reaction. The absorbance of the solution was then read in each well. The relative conversion of PI3P to PI2P was calculated to reflect the phosphatase activity of PTEN.
RT-PCR
Total RNA was extracted using Trizol reagent (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Reverse transcription was performed using M-MLV reverse transcriptase, oligo dT primer and dNTPs (Promega), and the resultant cDNA was subjected to PCR. Primers for PTEN (forward: 5'-CCAATGTTCAGTGGCGGAACT-3' reverse: 5'-GAACTTGTCTTCCCGTCGTGTG-3'), Bim (forward: 5'-GAGCCACAAGACAGGAGC-3' reverse: 5'-AAGGGCAATTCT-GAGGGA-3') and GAPDH (forward: 5'-CATCTTCCAGGAGC-GAGATC-3' reverse: 5'-GCTTGA-CAAAGTGGTCGTTG-3') were synthesized by Sangon Biotech (Shanghai Co. Ltd., China). The band intensities of each band were normalized to the corresponding GAPDH bands.
Immunofluorescence
Cells were grown on coverslips for 24 h before treatment with 10 mmol/l selenite or PBS solution for 24 h. Cells were then fixed in 3.7% paraformaldehyde and permeabilized with 0.1% Triton X-100 solution for 10 min. After thorough washing with PBS three times, each for 5 min, the samples were blocked with 2% BSA solution for 30 min at room temperature. Subsequently, slides were incubated with the indicated primary antibodies overnight at 4 degC. Thereafter, cells were incubated with FITC- or Cy3-labeled secondary antibodies for 1 h at room temperature, followed by counterstaining with DAPI solution. Images were acquired using an Olympus laser scanning confocal FV1000 microscope (Olympus, Tokyo, Japan) and analyzed using Olympus Fluoview software. Representative images are shown in figures with identical settings.
Apoptosis assay
The percentage of cells undergoing apoptosis was determined using Annexin V/PI double staining with the Apoptosis Detection Kit from Merck Calbiochem. The assay was performed according to the manufacturer's instructions. Briefly, after performing the indicated treatments, cells were harvested and washed twice with pre-cold PBS buffer, and then cells were stained with Annexin V and PI in 1 x binding buffer. The percentage of cells undergoing apoptosis was determined using an Accuri C6 flow cytometer (Accuri Cytometers Inc., Ann Arbor, MI, USA). All experiments were performed three times independently, and the results are expressed as the mean values+-S.D.
ChIP assay
ChIP assays were performed using the SimpleChIP Enzymatic Chromatin IP Kit (Cell Signaling Technology) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Briefly, the proteins were crosslinked to DNA in live nuclei using 1% formaldehyde (Sigma-Aldrich). The crosslinked chromatin was extracted from cells using buffer A and buffer B provided in the ChIP kit and then digested using micrococcal nuclease for 20 min at 37 degC into small fragments. The crosslinked chromatin was aliquoted and immunoprecipitated using 2 mg of foxo3a antibody and normal rabbit immunoglobulin G antibody overnight at 4 degC with gentle rotation. The complexes were captured by ChIP-Grade Protein G agarose beads for 2 h at 4 degC with gentle rotation. Following thorough washing, bound DNA fragments were eluted and analyzed by subsequent PCR using primers for PTEN and bim as follows: PTEN: forward 5'-GCATTTCCGAATCAGCTCTCT-3' reverse: 5'-CCAAGTGACTTATCTCTGGTCTGAG-3' and bim: forward 5'-AGGCAGAACAGGAGGAGA-3' reverse 5'-AACCCGTTTGTA-AGAGGC-3'.
Immunohistochemistry evaluation
The colorectal xenograft model was established as previously described.8 All animal procedures were performed in accordance with the guidelines issued by the committee on animal research of Peking Union Medical College and approved by the institutional ethics committee. At the termination of the experiments, tumor tissues from both the control and selenite-treated groups were sectioned. Half of these samples were homogenized and subjected to western blotting as described above, whereas the remaining tissues were embedded in paraffin for immunohistochemical analysis. First, 4 mm thick tissue sections were prepared on slides and then were dewaxed and rehydrated in xylene and graded alcohols. Antigen retrieval was achieved by heating the slides in a 95 degC water bath with 0.01 mol/l citrate buffer at pH 6.0 for 20 min. Subsequently, endogenous peroxidase activity was quenched by incubation in 3% hydrogen peroxide solution (Zhongshan Gold Bridge, Beijing, China). Thereafter, slides were blocked with 10% goat serum for 0.5 h after which the sections were incubated with primary antibodies as indicated in the figures (Figure 5c and Supplementary Figure S5) for 1 h. After three sequential washes (5 min each) in PBS solution, these samples were incubated with a streptavidin-peroxidase complex for an additional 1 h. All of the above procedures were performed at room temperature. Next, a diaminobenzidine working solution was applied after additional washes. Finally, the slides were counterstained with hematoxylin.
Statistical analysis
Each experiment was repeated at least three times. For all the quantitative analyses represented in the histograms, the values are expressed as the mean values+-S.D. The significance of the differences between mean values were assessed using Student's t-test. All computations were calculated using the Microsoft Excel program.
