[Abstract, Introduction, Methods, Results, Discussion, Discussion]

Analysis of molecular aberrations of Wnt pathway gladiators in colorectal cancer in
the Kashmiri population. The development and progression of colorectal cancer (CRC) is a multi-step process, and the Wnt pathways with its two molecular gladiators adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) and b-catenin plays an important role in transforming a normal tissue into a malignant one. In this study, we aimed to investigate the role of aberrations in the APC and b-catenin genes in the pathogenesis of CRC in the Kashmir valley, and to correlate it with various clinicopathological variables. We examined the paired tumour and normal-tissue specimens of 86 CRC patients for the occurrence of aberrations in the mutation cluster region (MCR) of the APC gene and exon 3 of the b-catenin gene by polymerase chain reaction-single-strand conformation polymorphism (PCR-SSCP) and/or PCR-direct sequencing. Analysis of promoter hypermethylation of the APC gene was also carried out using methylation-specific PCR (MS-PCR). The overall mutation rate of the MCR of the APC gene among 86 CRC cases was 12.8 per cent (11 of 86). Promoter hypermethylation of APC was observed in 54.65 per cent (47 of 86) of cases. Furthermore, we found a significant association between tumour location, tumour grade and node status and the methylation status of the APC gene (p <= 0.05). Although the number of mutations in the APC and b-catenin genes in our CRC cases was very low, the study confirms the role of epigenetic gene silencing of the pivotal molecular gladiator, APC, of the Wnt pathway in the development of CRC in the Kashmiri population.

Introduction
Colorectal cancer (CRC) is a major cause of mortality and morbidity, and the third most
common malignancy in the world [1]. The incidence
of this malignancy shows considerable variation among racially or ethnically defined
populations in multiracial/ethnic countries. It is the fourth most common cancer in men
and the third most common in women worldwide [1].
Kashmir has been reported as being a high-incidence area for gastrointestinal (GIT)
cancers [2,3]. In the
Kashmir valley, CRC represents the third most common GIT cancer after oesophageal and
gastric cancer [4,5].
It has been suggested that CRC is a multi-step process which arises from cumulative
aberrations of a number of different genes (including tumour suppressor genes,
proto-oncogenes, DNA repair genes, the genes encoding growth factors and their
receptors, cell cycle checkpoint genes and apoptosis-related genes) or from epigenetic
changes in DNA at different stages of development and progression [6,7]. It is believed that mutations
in the gene encoding adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) or that encoding
b-catenin set the stage for the initiation and transformation of normal
colonic epithelial cells. Further accumulation of mutations in other genes then
contributes to the progression of cancer through adenoma - carcinoma - metastasis
stages. The generally accepted model of CRC tumorigenesis for the majority of tumours
has been a stepwise progression, in which mutations in APC are followed by
several other mutations, including alterations in the genes encoding Kirsten ras
(K-ras) and tumour protein 53 (TP53) [6-8]. During the accumulation of
genetic changes, a complex signalling network is established among inactivated and
activated cellular pathways [9].
The Wnt pathway regulates cell adhesion, morphology, proliferation, migration and
structural remodelling [9,10] and plays an important role in a variety of cellular processes,
including proliferation, differentiation, survival, apoptosis and cell motility
[11]. Loss of regulation of the Wnt
pathway has been implicated in the development of several types of cancers, including
colon, lung, breast, thyroid and prostate cancers and leukemia [12-15]. Two of the most important gladiator molecules of the Wnt
pathway are APC and b-catenin.
APC is a classical tumour suppressor gene, located on 5q21, containing 21
exons. The APC transcript is 9.0 kilobases (kb) in length and the most common
isoform of the APC protein contains 2,843 amino acids, with a molecular weight of 310
kD. Exon 15 of APC is most important, as it comprises > 75 per cent of the
coding sequence of APC and hence is the common target for both germline and
somatic mutations, which usually span codons 1286-1513 of this exon [16,17]. This region represents the
mutation cluster region (MCR), and 68-77 per cent of somatic mutations in APC
occur in this region [18]. Mutations in
APC are considered to be the earliest genetic aberrations in the initiation
and progression of CRC,[7,9,19] and have also been found in ~60-80 per cent of
sporadic carcinomas and adenomas [20,21]. Using mutant mouse models, various genetic studies have
demonstrated that mutations in APC are responsible for intestinal tumorigenesis
[22-24]. Homozygous APC mutations in mice lead to embryonic
lethality,[23,25,26] and conditional deletion of the gene in the adult
mouse disrupts homeostasis, not only in the intestines but also in other tissues
[27-29].
In addition to the mutational inactivation, hypermethylation of the gene promoter is
another important mechanism associated with gene silencing [30]. In many tumours the hypermethylation of CpG islands in gene
promoters has been found to be a frequent epigenetic change in cancers, and is usually
associated with the loss of transcription of APC [31-38]. Hypermethylation of the APC
gene promoters has been reported in about 20-48 per cent of human CRCs
[32,37,39,40].
The b-catenin gene is located at 3p22-p21.3 and encompasses 23.2 kb of DNA. It
contains 16 exons, with a mRNA transcript of about 2343 base pairs (bp), encoding a
781-amino-acid-residue protein with a molecular weight of 92 kD [41]. This gene is mutated in up to 10 per cent of all sporadic
CRC by point mutations or in frame deletions of the serine and threonine residues that
are phosphorylated by glycogen synthase kinase 3-beta (GSK3b) [42]. These mutations result in the stabilisation of
b-catenin and the activation of Wnt signalling. Mutations in the b-catenin
gene occur in exclusivity to APC aberrations, as both molecules are
components of the same pathway [19].
Based on the hypothesis that CRC carcinogenesis is a multi-step and multi-gene event, we
designed this study to elucidate the role of APC and b-catenin in
the development and progression of CRC in the Kashmiri population, and to correlate the
gene aberrations and hypermethylation with the clinicopathological parameters of CRC
cases.

Materials and methods
Patients and specimens
Out of 104 patients who were diagnosed with CRC by clinicians using either
sigmoidoscopy or colonoscopy and confirmed by MRI, a total of 86 CRC tissue
specimens, comprising tumour tissues and corresponding adjacent normal tissues as
controls, were collected for analysis. All samples were surgically resected and
collected fresh at the Department of Surgery of the Sher-I-Kashmir Institute of
Medical Sciences, Srinagar, Kashmir. Tissue samples were divided into two parts; one
part was sent for histopathological diagnosis and the other was snap-frozen at
-70degC immediately until needed for further analysis. Only histopathologically
confirmed cases were included for molecular analysis. No follow-up of the CRC
patients was carried out after the curative surgery. Written informed consent was
obtained from all the subjects (and/or their guardians) included in the study,
recorded on a prede-signed questionnaire (available on request). The study was
carried out in accordance with the principles of the Helsinki Declaration. The study
protocol was approved by the Research Ethics Committee of the Sher-I-Kashmir
Institute of Medical Sciences, Kashmir.
DNA isolation
Genomic DNA was extracted from blood and tissue samples (previously stored at
-70degC) from CRC patients using DNA Extraction Kit II (Zymo Research, Orange,
CA). The tissue for DNA extraction from the tumour sample was chosen by an
experienced pathologist and was ascertained to comprise more than 90 per cent of the
tumour cells.
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
APC and b-catenin gene analysis was carried out on all of the
extracted DNA samples. The MCR region of APC, comprising codons 1260 to
1596, and exon 3 of b-catenin, which encompasses the region for
GSK-3b phosphorylation, were amplified using specific oligonucleotide primers
(Table 1). PCR was performed in a 50 ml total volume
reaction mixture containing 50 ng of genomic DNA, 100 ng of each primer, 100 mM
of each deoxynucleotide triphosphate (dNTP), 1.5 mM MgCl2, 10x Taq
buffer and 2 U of Taq DNA polymerase (Fermentas Inc, Glen Burnie, MD). The conditions
of PCR were as follows: initial denaturation at 95degC for 5 minutes, 35 cycles of
denaturation at 95degC, annealing at 52-58degC (see Table 1) and extension at 72degC, for 30 seconds each, and final extension at
72degC for 7 minutes in a Biorad icycler. The PCR products were run on
2-3 per cent agarose gel and analysed under an ultraviolet illuminator.
Mutation analysis of the APC gene
Mutation analysis of the APC gene was performed on all cases. Four sets of
oligonucleotide primers that have previously been reported were used for
fragment-wise amplification (APCA, B, C and D) of codons 1260 to 1596 [43]. All amplicons were 300 bp in length (Figure
1A-D, Table 1), and were then
subjected to single-strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) analysis. For the samples
showing an aberrant band in the SSCP analysis, APC BF and APC DR
primers were used to amplify the 890 bp target region (Figure 1E) and then were subjected to direct sequencing (Macrogen Inc, Seoul,
Korea), including the original 300 bp amplicons; however, studying the aberrations of
only the MCR was a limitation of this study.
Figure 1A-E
Representative gel picture of mutation cluster regions of APC gene
comprising of Exon 15 APCA (295 bp); APCB (293 bp); APCC (290 bp); APCD (295
bp); and APC Full (890 bp) fragments. Lane M: Molecular size marker 100
bp (Middle Prominent Band = 500 bp) Lane 1-6: Amplified product from cancer
samples.
Mutation analysis of the b-catenin gene
Genomic DNA from each sample was amplified by PCR using the previously reported
primer pair, which amplified a 200-bp amplicon of exon 3 of the b-catenin
gene (Figure 2A, Table 1)
[43].
Figure 2A
Amplified DNA fragment (200 bp amplicon) of exon 3 of b-catenin
gene. Lane M: 100 bp molecular ladder, Lanes 1-7: Amplicons from
different tumour tissues.
Base substitutions in codons 32 and 33 were further confirmed by the HinfI
restriction endonuclease assay (Fermentas). The 200-bp PCR product for
b-catenin contains two HinfI restriction endonuclease
sites, yielding 7-bp, 55-bp and 138-bp DNA fragments after digestion of the wild-type
allele. b-catenin gene mutations in codons 32 and 33 yield only 62-bp
and 138-bp fragments after digestion because of ablation of the first HinfI
site. The digested products were run on 10 per cent polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis (PAGE) (Figure 2B) to assess the digested
fragments.
Figure 2B
PAGE analysis of Hinf I digest of 200 bp amplicon of exon 3 of the
b-catenin gene. Lane M: 100 bp molecular ladder, Lanes
1-14: HinfI digested amplicons of the b-catenin gene. Lane 11
shows the codon 32 mutant.
SSCP analysis
SSCP analysis of PCR products was carried out on 6 per cent non-denaturing
polyacrylamide gel (PAG) utilising either non-radioactive silver staining or
radioactive procedures, as explained previously [4,44]. In non-radioactive SSCP analysis, PCR products
were mixed together in denaturing buffer (95 per cent formamide, 10 mM NaOH, 0.05 per
cent xylene-cyanol FF and 0.05 per cent bromophenol blue) in a 1:1 ratio, heat
denatured at 95degC for 5 minutes and immediately cooled on ice for 20 minutes. Of
the resulting product, 6 ml was loaded on 6 per cent PAG and electrophoresed in
0.5x Tris-borate EDTA buffer at +- 17degC at 4 W constant power for 18-22
hours. Gels were then silver stained. In radioactive SSCP analysis, radiolabelled PCR
products (using a32-pCTP) were mixed in a denaturing loading buffer (95 per cent
formamide, 20 mM EDTA, 0.05 per cent xylene-cyanol FF and 0.05 per cent bromophenol
blue) in a 1:10 ratio and heat denatured at 95degC for 5 minutes. Of the resulting
product, 3 ml was loaded on 6 per cent PAG and electrophoresed at 4 W constant
power in 0.5x Tris-borate ethylene diamine tetra-acetic acid (EDTA) buffer at
+- 17degC for 18-22 hours. The gel was then transferred onto 3 mm Whatman
paper, covered with Saran wrap and dried in a vacuum drier at 90degC for 1 hour.
The Saran wrap was then replaced by X-ray film and kept at -70degC for 48
hours.
The mobility shift in DNA bands was visualised by developing the X-ray film. Purified
PCR products of the samples showing mobility shift on SSCP analysis and randomly
chosen samples were used for direct DNA sequencing.
Methylation-specific PCR (MS-PCR) of APC promoters
Both normal and tumour DNAs were subjected to sodium bisulphite modification using
the EZ DNA Methylation Kit (Zymo Research, Irvine, CA). About 10 ul of DNA from each
sample was modified as described in the protocol. Previously reported primer sets
were used for amplification of the two promoters - 1A and 1B of the APC gene
(Table 2) [32,37].
PCR was performed in a 50 ml total volume reaction mixture containing 10 ng of
modified genomic DNA, 100 ng of each primer, 100 mM of each dNTP, 1.5 mM
MgCl2, 5 per cent dimethyl sulphoxide (DMSO), 10x Taq buffer and 2
U of Taq DNA polymerase (Fermentas). The reactions were hot started at 97degC for
10 minutes before the addition of 0.75 units of Taq polymerase (Fermentas). The PCR
conditions were as follows: 40 cycles of denaturation at 95degC for 40 seconds,
annealing at the temperatures specified in Table 1 for 45
seconds, extension at 72degC for 45 seconds and a final extension at 72degC for
10 minutes to complete each PCR. The PCR amplicons were electrophoresed on 2.5 per
cent agarose gels and were visualised after staining with ethidium bromide (Figure
3A and 3B).
Figure 3A
PAGE analysis of APC 1A promoter methylation. Lane M: 50 bp
molecular ladder Lanes 1-14: amplicons from paired samples. Case 1 and 5:
Unmethylated APC 1A promoter Cases 2, 3, 4 and 6: Methylated APC
1A promoter C1 and C2: Internal unmethylated and methylated human DNA
controls.
Figure 3B
PAGE analysis of APC 1B promoter methylation. Lane M: 50 bp
molecular ladder Lanes 1-14: amplicons from paired samples. Case 1, 5 and 7:
Unmethylated APC 1B promoter Cases 2, 3, 4 and 6: Methylated APC
1B promoter.
Universal Methylated Human DNA (Zymo Research) was used as positive control for
methylated alleles whereas DNA from normal lymphocytes was used as a control for
unmethylated alleles. Water was used as a negative PCR control in both reactions.
Direct sequencing
PCR amplicons of the tumour samples and from randomly chosen normal samples were
first purified using the DNA Recovery Kit (Zymo Research) and then used for direct
DNA sequencing. DNA sequencing was carried out at Macrogen Inc. To minimise the
sequencing artefacts by PCR, amplicons from at least two different PCRs were
sequenced using forward and reverse primers.
Statistical analysis
All statistical analysis was performed using PASW software, version 18 (IBM, New
York, NY). Pearson's chi-square two-proportion test was used to evaluate the
hypothesis of equal distribution of molecular alterations with different
clinicopathological variables. A Fisher's two-tailed test (p values) of 0.05
or less was considered to be statistically significant.

Results
Of 86 confirmed cases of CRC, 38 were of Dukes' A + B stage and 48 were of C + D stage.
All patients presented with constipation and bleeding per rectum as their chief
complaint. Furthermore, 81 of these cases were sporadic, four had familial adenomatous
polyposis and one had Lynch syndrome. All but one case had adenocarcinoma and only one
had squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) of the basal cell type. Thirty-seven patients were
female and 49 male; 59 were rural and 27 urban; 36 cases had carcinoma in the colon and
50 in the rectum; and 55 were smokers and 31 non-smokers (Table 3).
Mutation analysis of APC
The overall mutation rate of the MCR of APC among the 86 patients was 12.8
per cent (11 of 86). This is in contrast to other studies that have reported APC
as the main gene to undergo aberration in CRC, with a frequency of about 60 per
cent. DNA sequencing revealed four missense mutations, three nonsense mutations and
four frameshift mutations, including three deletions and one insertion (Table 4, Figure 4). Among the three nonsense
mutations, two were Leu > Stop and one was Lys > Stop.
Figure 4
Partial electropherograms representing the mutant (above) and normal (below)
forms (shown by arrows) of the mutation cluster region (MCR) of
APC. (A) Deletion of the AAAAG pentamer at codons 1307/08/09 in
the MCR region of APC and deletion of the AA dimer at codons 1307/08
in the MCR region of APC. (B) Insertion of A at codon 1525 in the MCR
region of APC. (C) Polymorphism of codon 1492 in the MCR region of
APC.
We also found a novel single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in our study, a G > A
polymorphism in codon 1492 of APC. The polymorphism changes ACG to ACA,
without changing the resulting amino-acid residue. We found, that among 86 CRC cases,
only 14 (16.3 per cent) had the homozygous wild-type (GG) genotype, while 53 (61.6
per cent) had the homozygous variant (AA) genotype and 19 (22.1 per cent) had the
heterozygous (GA) genotype (Table 5, Figures 3A and 3B). In addition, 72 cases had G > A
variants, 67 were variants for G > A at codon 1492 only, while five also had
mutations at other sites.
Mutation analysis of the b-catenin gene
The overall mutation rate of the b-catenin gene was 8.1 per cent (seven
of 86). Of these seven mutations, three affected codon 32, three affected codon 49
and one affected codon 45 (Figure 5, Table 6); five were missense and two were nonsense mutations. Both nonsense
mutations affected codon 49, changing lysine to a stop codon leading to truncation of
the protein. In addition, five of the seven patients with b-catenin
mutations had higher-grade tumours (C + D). One also had a mutation in
APC, but six b-catenin had an intact APC gene.
Figure 5
Partial electropherograms representing the mutant (above) and normal (below)
forms (shown by arrows) of exon 3 of the b-catenin gene (AAA >
TAA).
Hypermethylation of APC promoters
Methylation analysis of APC carried out on two promoters, 1A and 1B,
revealed a high methylation status of these two promoters. Forty-seven (54.65 per
cent) of the tumours were methylated at either one of the two promoter regions, while
39 (45.35 per cent) of the tumours were not methylated at any of the promoters
(Tables 3 and 7). Among the tumours which were methylated, only nine (19.1 per cent)
were found to be methylated at the APC 1A promoter exclusively, 15 (31.9 per
cent) were found to be methylated at the APC 1B promoter exclusively, while
23 (48.9 per cent) tumours were methylated at both promoters. Furthermore, we also
found that only four tumours were mutated as well as hypermethylated for the APC
gene (Table 8). Statistical analysis showed a significant
association between APC methylation status and the age group, tumour
location (colon) and tumour grade (C + D) of the patients (Table 3).

Discussion
The Kashmir valley, located in the northern division of India, has a unique ethnic
population, living in temperate environmental conditions and with distinctive food
habits, which, along with genetic factors, play a large role in the development of GIT
cancers [3-5,45]. As previously reported, the
aetiology and incidence of various GIT cancers in this population has been attributed to
a probable exposure to nitroso compounds, amines and nitrates reported to be present in
local foodstuffs such as hoakhe suen (sun-dried vegetables), pharei
and hoggade (sundried and/or smoked fish and meat), hakh (a leafy
vegetable of the Brassica family), hot noon chai (salted tea), dried
and pickled vegetables and red chilli, and also through smoking hukka (a water
pipe) [2-5,46].
According to the multi-step model of colorectal tumorigenesis,[7] the most common and principal causes of APC
inactivation are gene aberrations. A somatic mutation in APC leads to a
truncated protein in most sporadic CRCs [15,36]. Hypermethylation of APC at the promoter
region constitutes an alternative mechanism for APC inactivation in breast,
lung and GIT cancers, especially CRCs [30,33,34,38,40,47]. Combined with these two mechanisms
of APC inactivation and the aberrations in the b-catenin gene,
the Wnt pathway molecules play an important role in CRC development and progression
[48,49].
The present study involved the mutational analysis of exon 15 (MCR) of APC and
exon 3 of the b-catenin gene and also the hypermethylation analysis of two
promoters of APC. Although being the important genetic molecule of the Wnt
pathway, and implicated in almost 60 per cent of sporadic CRCs, we found APC
gene to be aberrant in only 12.79 per cent of CRCs, which was considerably lower
than the previously reported frequencies [9,19,35,50-53]. This low
frequency suggests that APC may not be the foremost gene to be implicated in
the development of CRCs in this population.
Furthermore, we found an SNP (G > A) at codon 1492 in 72 (83.7 per cent) CRC cases. Out
of 72 cases, 53 were homozygous variants. This was a novel finding, as it has not been
reported previously.
We also found a low frequency (8.1 per cent; seven of 86) of b-catenin mutations in
CRC. These results were in line with those in the published literature [54-57]. Exon 3 of b-catenin contains a
regulatory domain which is the hotspot for genetic aberrations. Mutations in this exon
have been reported in various tumours, resulting in its nuclear accumulation and leading
to progression of the tumour [9,43,58]. The mutations in the hotspot codons
- 32, 33, 41, 45 and 49 - in exon 3 of b-catenin result in an amino acid
change at the GSK-3b phosphorylation sites, which in turn affect the
phosphorylation mechanism and result in the decreased sequestration of
b-catenin by APC [58].
Furthermore, the mutation affecting codon 45 (TCT > TTT; Ser > Phe) was present in a
Lynch syndrome patient, as has been reported previously [55,56]. Also, six of seven tumour samples
which harboured b-catenin gene mutations were wild-type for APC
(MCR only), which further corroborated findings in the literature that mutations of
the genes encoding these two Wnt pathway molecules are mutually exclusive [9,54,57,59,60]. Only one case (A9) had mutations in
both genes (Tables 4 and 6). Overall, mutations in Wnt pathway molecule genes were found
to be present in 20.9 per cent (18 of 86) of CRC cases. Thus, our observation identifies
this pathway as being important in determining the development and progression of CRC
but is less important than in other populations, where the mutational frequency of these
Wnt gladiators is higher.
CpG island hypermethylation is one of the important mechanisms of gene inactivation.
Cancer cell lines have in general demonstrated an increased frequency of
hypermethylation by comparison with primary tumours [61]. Inactivation of tumour suppressor genes by promoter
hypermethylation has been recognised to be as common as gene disruption by mutation in
tumorigenesis [36,37,62,63]. A number of studies on CRC around
the globe have demonstrated the role of promoter hypermethylation of a number of
different genes in the development and progression of CRC [32,64,65]. Promoter
hypermethylation of APC, similarly to that of other genes, plays a pivotal role
in the inactivation of APC, which in turn enhances tumour development
[30,33].
In the present study, we found hypermethylation in 54.65 per cent (47/86) of CRC cases,
which is consistent with the results found in some other major studies, although
markedly higher than reported in others [30,32,33]. However, only 26.7 per
cent (23/86) of the tumours were hypermethylated at both the 1A and 1B promoters. This
may be due to the fact that there is less mutational inactivation of APC in
this population and also because this population is exposed to a special set of
environmental challenges, such as extreme temperature, high altitude, special food
habits and exposure to agricultural by-products such as pesticides and nitrosamines
[5,46]. As has been
revealed in previous studies, promoter hypermethylation constitutes an alternative hit
in the inactivation of APC in cancers,[39,66] and we have identified the same phenomenon as the
major cause of APC inactivation in our population. Various studies have shown
transcriptional repression of APC by hypermethylation in tumours as well as
cell lines [34,67].
Arnold et al. demonstrated the loss of protein expression due to the promoter
hypermethylation of APC [39]. In
addition, 42.8 per cent (three of seven) of patients with a mutation in
b-catenin were also found to have hypermethylation of APC. We
found the methylation status of the APC promoter to be associated with age (>
60), tumour location (colon) and nodal status/tumour grade (C + D) in CRC.

Conclusion
We conclude that, in the Kashmir valley population, although mutational aberration of
the genes encoding two pivotal molecules of the Wnt pathway - APC and
b-catenin - occurs at a low frequency in CRC cases, the high level of
epigenetic silencing of APC plays a pivotal role in the initial tumorigenesis
and also enhances the chances of tumour development and progression to advanced
stages.
