[Abstract, Introduction, Methods, Results, Discussion, Mixed]

Towards the Human Colorectal Cancer Microbiome. Multiple factors drive the progression from healthy mucosa towards sporadic                     colorectal carcinomas and accumulating evidence associates intestinal bacteria                     with disease initiation and progression. Therefore, the aim of this study was to                     provide a first high-resolution map of colonic dysbiosis that is associated with                     human colorectal cancer (CRC). To this purpose, the microbiomes colonizing colon                     tumor tissue and adjacent non-malignant mucosa were compared by deep rRNA                     sequencing. The results revealed striking differences in microbial colonization                     patterns between these two sites. Although inter-individual colonization in CRC                     patients was variable, tumors consistently formed a niche for                         Coriobacteria and other proposed probiotic bacterial                     species, while potentially pathogenic Enterobacteria were                     underrepresented in tumor tissue. As the intestinal microbiota is generally                     stable during adult life, these findings suggest that CRC-associated                     physiological and metabolic changes recruit tumor-foraging commensal-like                     bacteria. These microbes thus have an apparent competitive advantage in the                     tumor microenvironment and thereby seem to replace pathogenic bacteria that may                     be implicated in CRC etiology. This first glimpse of the CRC microbiome provides                     an important step towards full understanding of the dynamic interplay between                     intestinal microbial ecology and sporadic CRC, which may provide important leads                     towards novel microbiome-related diagnostic tools and therapeutic                     interventions.

Introduction
The human intestinal tract contains about 1014 bacteria, comprising
                    ~103 species, which are essential for digestion of food, the
                control of intestinal epithelial homeostasis, intestinal development and human
                health [1].
                Conversely, a large body of evidence supports a relationship between infective
                agents and human cancers [2] and suggests that certain mucosa-associated bacterial
                species play an important role in the pathogenesis of colorectal cancer (CRC; [3], [4], [5]. Moreover,
                clinical associations between bacterial infection and CRC have been described for
                many decades, the most prominent of which concern infections with
                    Streptococcus bovis
[6], [7] and
                    Clostridium septicum
[8]. However, the
                co-incidence of these infections with CRC is very low (<1%) since such
                low-grade opportunistic pathogens can only become clinically manifest in compromised
                patients. Correspondingly, serological data have shown an increased exposure to
                    S. bovis antigens in early stage CRC patients without clinical
                signs of bacterial infection [9]. Based on this, it has been suggested that specific gut
                bacteria have a competitive advantage in the CRC microenvironment, whereas
                opportunistic infections remain repressed by the active immune system in the
                majority of patients.
Recent publications have provided mechanistic evidence for the involvement of gut
                bacteria in the development of CRC, which comprises i), production of DNA damaging
                superoxide radicals, ii) production of genotoxins, iii) T helper cell-dependent
                induction of cell proliferation, iv) Toll-like receptor mediated induction of
                pro-carcinogenic pathways [10]-[14]. Despite this vast body of circumstantial evidence,
                however, no clinical data have thus far been available to directly show distinct
                bacterial colonization patterns in CRC patients. In fact, the molecular nature of
                the complex intestinal community was largely unexplored prior to the moment that
                Eckburg and coworkers [15] revealed the presence of ~400 bacterial species by
                sequencing prokaryotic ribosomal RNA gene sequences from multiple colonic mucosal
                sites and feces of healthy subjects. Further investigations revealed high
                intra-individual variation of intestinal microbiomes in the human population,
                whereas the microbial colonization of the mucosa within adult individuals is
                relatively stable throughout the colon [16]-[18]. Based on the latter
                observations we hypothesized that the in-depth analysis of a relatively small number
                of paired on/off-tumour tissue samples from CRC patients could disclose bacterial
                species that might be implicated in CRC etiology. To achieve this goal, we used deep
                pyrosequencing of bacterial rRNA to compare CRC tumor microbiomes to that of
                adjacent non-malignant mucosa across six patients. The data provided the first
                high-resolution image of the human CRC microbiome and showed that CRC is associated
                with quite dramatic shifts in the adherent intestinal microbiota.

Materials and Methods
Patient Material
Six patients (labeled A-F, Table 1) underwent resections for primary colon adenocarcinoma at
                    the Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre. After resection, the colonic
                    specimens were extensively rinsed with sterile water after which the specimens
                    were examined by an oncological pathologist. Disease was staged according to the
                    Tumor-Node-Metastasis (TNM) classification [19]. From each colonic
                    specimen, biopsies were taken from the tumor site ("on-tumor",
                        Aon-Fon) and from adjacent non-malignant tissue
                    ("off-tumor", Aoff-Foff) on the luminal
                    side of the colonic wall (distance about 5-10 cm). Tissue specimens were
                    disrupted by mechanical shearing after which total DNA was extracted using the
                    AllPrep DNA/RNA kit (Qiagen). All samples were stored at -80degC until
                    use.
Ethics Statement
Research was conducted according to the principles expressed in the Declaration
                    of Helsinki. The study was approved by the by the Medical Ethical Committee of
                    the district Arnhem-Nijmegen (The Netherlands); patients provided written
                    informed consent for the collection of samples and subsequent analysis when
                    required.
Denaturing Gradient Gel Electrophoresis (DGGE) and Ribosomal Intergenic
                    Spacer Analysis (RISA)
Using total DNA from the 12 colonic biopsies as a template, bacterial 16S rRNA
                    genes were amplified by a nested approach [20] using the primers pairs
                    27f/1492r [21]
                    and L1401r/968f-GC [22], [23] in two subsequent PCR reactions (Table S1).
                    DGGE was performed on the resulting PCR mixture as described previously [24]. It
                    should be noted that visible bands (see Figure 1) represent bacterial species that
                    have an abundance of at least 1-10% of the total community, whereas
                    low abundant species will not result in a detectable bands by this approach. To
                    confirm DGGE data, bacterial ribosomal intergenic spacer regions were amplified
                    with primers 1406f and 23Sr using the same DNA as template (Table S1;
                        [24]).
                    RISA was performed as described previously [23].
10.1371/journal.pone.0020447.g001
Figure 1
DGGE Fingerprinting of CRC Tissue and Non-malignant Adjacent
                            Mucosa.
An internal fragment (~450 bps) of the bacterial 16S rRNA gene was
                            amplified from colon tissue-extracted DNA by a broad-range PCR approach
                            after which these amplicon mixtures were applied to DGGE. Patient
                            characteristics can be found in Table 1; off,
                            non-malignant tissue; on, tumor tissue.
FLX 454 titanium pyrosequencing
In the second step of the nested PCR approach, we amplified the V1-V3
                    region of the bacterial 16S rRNA gene using primer pairs tagged with 12 distinct
                            Metagenome
                            IDentification (MID) tags (Table S1).
                    454 sequencing was performed at the University of Liverpool's Advanced
                    Genomics Facility. Sequences are available on request.<
Read processing and community diversity
All partial 16S rRNA gene sequences were processed initially using the
                    Pyro-pipeline at the Ribosomal database project (RDP, [25]; Release 10) to trim and
                    remove primers from the partial ribotags and to limit sequences to >400 bp
                    and < = 500 bp, sequences were processed using the
                    pre.cluster command which minimizes errors introduced by the pyrosequencing
                    platform [26].
                    This step provided the datasets for analysis (Table S2)
                    with the read length histograms shown in Figure S2A. The data from
                    all the samples was processed using MOTHUR [27] to generate indices of
                    diversity, rarefaction curves (Figure S2B) and to undertake
                    the Libshuff analysis of sample similarity. MOTHUR was run using the
                    computational facilities of the Advanced Research Computing @ Cardiff (ARCCA)
                    Division, Cardiff University. Comparisons of the libraries from an individual
                    was performed using the RDP's Library compare tool. Analysis of the
                    ribotags was also performed using MEGAN [28] for which the input was the
                    csv output from the RDP's classifier pipeline (using default settings and a
                    confidence level of 50%). The comparison tool was selected and reads
                    normalized between samples and Bonferroni correction used to highlight
                    differences between samples. An alignment independent analysis of the date was
                    also undertaken using 5-mers and frequency landscape distribution (fLAND)
                    analysis [29]-[31]. The generation of the 5-mers was performed using a
                    bespoke PERL script (written by BED; available on request) and PCA analysis was
                    undertaken in MATLAB on ARCCA, the fLAND analysis was performed using the
                    software fLAND.
Consistency analysis
Biases in microbiota between the on-tumor and off-tumor samples across patients
                    were summarized in order to identify taxa which were either consistently
                    enriched or consistently depleted in the two niches. All pyrosequencing reads
                    were first mapped to the SILVA comprehensive database of aligned, quality
                    checked 16S/18S rRNA sequences >300 nt (version SSUParc_100; [32]) using
                    BLAT v34 with default parameters and cutoffs [33]. We assumed that each read
                    was derived from a different micro-organism and that the sampling of reads
                    represented the taxonomic distribution within the intestinal microbiota. For
                    each sample, every read was assigned to its most similar sequence in the SILVA
                    database and a summary of the taxonomic annotations of the detected database
                    sequences was generated. Each taxonomic clade was assessed to determine whether
                    it showed a higher fraction of reads in off-tumor or on-tumor samples for every
                    patient, and a consistency score was calculated by counting
                    "+1" if the clade was higher off-tumor, "-1"
                    if the clade was higher on-tumor, and "0" if the fraction of reads
                    on- and off-tumor was identical (e.g. if the clade was not measured in this
                    patient). Finally, these scores were summed, yielding an overall consistency
                    score between -6 and +6 that reflects how consistently the clade was
                    enriched or depleted across all patients. Note that each sequence in the SILVA
                    database has two taxonomic annotations, i.e. EMBL and RDP.

Results
DGGE fingerprinting
As a first exploration, profiles of bacterial 16S rRNA genes were generated using
                    DGGE for tumor and matching adjacent non-malignant (off-tumor) mucosa from 6 CRC
                    patients (Table 1). As
                    shown in Figure 1, the
                    microbial communities of tumor tissue and adjacent "off-tumor"
                    mucosa were strikingly different and similar results were obtained when RISA
                    fingerprinting was applied to the same samples (Figure S1).
                    Notably, this result sharply contrasts with the previous observations that the
                    colonic mucosal microbiota is almost identical at adjacent sites in healthy
                    subjects [15], [16], [34]-[36]. Inspired by this striking observation, we next aimed
                    for a microbiome sequencing approach to map the microbiome changes at a high
                    resolution rather than sequencing of individual distinguishing bands that only
                    represent the abundant species in a certain sample.
FLX 454 titanium pyrosequencing
To define the colon tumor microbiome at a deep level, we amplified and sequenced
                    the V1-V3 region of the bacterial 16S rRNA genes (Table S1),
                    which resulted in a total of 193,880 ribotags of length 401-500 bp. The
                    data showed high coverage values (>88%) and rarefaction curves
                    indicated satisfactory sampling of the communities at 90% identity (Figure
                            S2B; Table S2). Libshuff analysis indicated that
                    all on- and off-tumor communities were significantly different (p<0.0001)
                    from each other (Table S3). Importantly, both alignment-dependent and independent
                    methods supported the observation of these altered tumor microbiomes (Figure 2, Figure
                        S2C and D; Table S3).
                    Moreover, while DGGE and RISA only showed minor differences for patient D,
                    subtle, but significant, differences could be identified by the deep sequencing
                    approach. This clearly exemplifies the superior resolution that can be obtained
                    with the latter technology. The data showed a general tendency of more
                    Bacteroidetes and less Firmicutes from in tumor tissue compared to matching
                    off-tumor mucosa (Figure S3). However, as could be expected the
                    observed microbiome shifts showed a high level of variability among patients
                        (Figure
                        S3A-F) and in certain cases were even contrary to the general
                    tendency (Figure
                            S3G). Although S. bovis or
                        C. septicum infections have a known clinical association
                    with CRC, only very few sequences mapped to rRNA of these two species and no
                    dependable colonization of CRC tissue was observed. This could be explained by
                    the fact that such opportunistic pathogens are predominantly present in the
                    transient adenoma stage of CRC [37].
10.1371/journal.pone.0020447.g002
Figure 2
Phylogenetic Analysis of Altered Microbiomes.
The 454 sequencing data were normalized in MEGAN (Huson et al. 2009) and
                            parsed through the RDP pyropipeline classifier tool (Cole et al. 2009)
                            to generate a csv file of taxonomic abundance. This file was used as
                            input for MEGAN to visualize in which families differences between
                            non-malignant tissue (off-tumor) and CRC tissue
                                (on-tumor) communities are present. A
                            high-resolution image of this Figure for "zoom-in" purposes
                            can be downloaded from Figure S2E.
Consistency analysis
To pinpoint the most imperative microbiome changes during formation of CRC,
                    consistency across the patients was calculated for each taxon individually by
                    giving it a score of "-1" if the normalized number of sequence
                    reads of that taxon in the tumor tissue was higher than in matching off-tumor
                    mucosa, "+1" if the taxon was more abundant in healthy mucosa
                    and "0" if it was not detected at all in that patient. Summing these
                    scores across patients resulted in a consistency score from -6 to +6
                    for each taxon (Tables 2
                    and S4,
                        Figure
                            S4A and B). It should be noted
                    that some sequences are better annotated by EMBL than by RDP, and vice
                        versa (see Figure S4C), so we report both rather than
                    preferentially trusting either of these taxonomic annotations. This approach
                    showed that CRC tissue was consistently associated with overrepresentation of
                    the subclass of Coriobacteridae, especially the genera
                        Slackia and Collinsella, which can be
                    regarded as gut commensals. On the other hand, members of the
                        Enterobacteriaceae, such as Citrobacter,
                        Shigella, Cronobacter,
                        Kluyvera, Serratia and
                        Salmonella spp. (scores between +4 and +6; Table 2; Figure
                            S4A and B) were
                    underrepresented in CRC tissue. Although these findings were consistent, the
                    relative abundance of these taxa differed considerably between on and off tumor
                    mucosa from the investigated patients as depicted in Figure 3.
10.1371/journal.pone.0020447.g003
Figure 3
Consistent Biases in Microbiota CRC Tissue and Non-malignant Adjacent
                            Mucosa.
Relative distribution of selected CRC over/under represented taxa was
                            calculated as the fraction annotated sequences of the total number of
                            reads in that specific sample. Consistency score for the indicated taxon
                            (see Table 2) is
                            given between brackets and reflects how consistently clades were
                            enriched across patients A-F; green bars indicate the fraction in
                                off-tumor and red bars indicate fraction of this
                            taxon on-tumor.

Discussion
The most striking observation from our current study was the dramatically different
                microbiomes in CRC tissue and adjacent non-malignant mucosa in 5 of the 6
                investigated patients. To our surprise, however, we found no consistent
                overrepresentation of potential pathogenic bacteria in CRC tissue. In contrast,
                overrepresented species concerned members of the genera
                    Coriobacteridae, Roseburia,
                    Fusobacterium and Faecalibacterium, which are
                generally regarded as gut commensals with pro-biotic features. This suggests that
                the observed microbial shifts are caused by the quite dramatic physiological and
                metabolic alterations that result from colon carcinogenesis itself [38]-[40], and that these
                species may be regarded as CRC passengers. In fact, recent metabolomics studies
                revealed extremely altered nutritional conditions in the CRC tumor microenvironment
                compared to non-malignant mucosa [41]. The most prominent and consistent findings concerned a
                drastic decrease in glucose and pyruvate and an increase in lactate (low pH), amino
                acids, lipids and fatty acids. The intra-patient variability in microbiome
                alterations could possibly reflect the intra-individual variability in the CRC tumor
                microenvironment [42], resulting in the preferential recruitment of different
                classes of intestinal species. Notably, reduced numbers of
                    Collinsella spp. and Roseburia spp. have
                previously been found in elderly subjects using non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
                drugs compared to non-users (NSAID [43]; suggesting that these
                bacteria need inflammatory niches to optimally colonize the bowel wall.
                Interestingly, the genera Roseburia, Fusobacterium
                and Faecalibacterium, which are moderately enriched in tumors
                belong to the major butyrate producing intestinal bacteria. Butyrate is thought to
                be protective against CRC by inducing a p21-dependent cell cycle arrest resulting in
                an increased apoptosis rate of carcinogenic cells [44]. The effects of butyrate are
                however still under debate as tumor inhibition may for instance be restricted to the
                early phases of carcinogenesis. Markedly, it has been shown that
                    Faecalibacterium prausnitzii secretes anti-inflammatory factors
                that block NF-kB activation and IL-8 production in an experimental animal model
                for Crohn's disease [45]. Moreover, patients with inflammatory bowel disease, who
                are at increased risk for CRC, have been associated with lower numbers of F.
                    prausnitzii in the intestinal population [46]. Finally,
                    Slackia spp. are known to convert dietary isoflavones into more
                potent anti-oxidants [47] capable of inducing apoptotic pathways in tumor cells
                    [48]. Thus in
                view of our current data, we could draw the conclusion that the CRC microenvironment
                is preferably colonized by intestinal bacteria with anti-tumorigenic and
                anti-carcinogenic properties, which thereby may prevent rapid progression of
                this disease. However, one could also argue that for instance butyrate provides an
                additional energy source for tumor cells, while dampening the inflammatory response
                stops the innate immune system from attacking the nascent tumor. Thus, both tumor
                suppressing or tumor promoting scenarios may be possible outcomes of the
                differential colonization of CRC tissue and further, detailed investigations, will
                be required to elucidate this issue.
Another remarkable observation concerned the decreased presence of members of the
                    Enterobacteriaceae, such as Citrobacter,
                    Shigella, Cronobacter,
                    Kluyvera, Serratia and
                    Salmonella spp. in tumour tissue of the investigated CRC
                patients. This data may suggest that these bacteria are part of the intrinsic
                microbiome of CRC patients, but outcompeted by the above mentioned commensal-like
                bacteria upon disease progression. Although we realize that in the absence of a
                large reference database of mucosal microbiomes from healthy individuals it is
                difficult to draw conclusions on this observation, we would like to take the
                opportunity to shortly review why Enterobacterial intestinal colonization could be
                associated with an increased risk for CRC. First, metagenomic inventories of the
                human intestinal microbiome showed that Salmonella,
                    Citrobacter, and Cronobacter were among the
                low abundant intestinal species or were even completely absent in healthy
                individuals [15],
                    [49], which is
                fully in-line with their pathogenic character [50]. Contrarily, this bacterial
                family was detectably present in non-malignant colonic mucosa samples from CRC
                patients [36],
                while Shen and colleagues recently showed that Shigella spp
                displayed an increased abundance in the intrinsic (non-malignant) microbiome of
                adenoma patients [51]. Importantly, the potential of Enterobacteria to initiate
                CRC has already been shown for Citrobacter species in an animal
                model [52], and it
                is thought that this increased susceptibility for CRC is caused by an asymptomatic,
                but chronic, inflammatory response in the colonic mucosa [53]. Additionally, several
                Enterobacterial strains produce DNA damaging genotoxins [54] and may thereby actively
                contribute to the accumulation of mutations that characterize the adenoma-carcinoma
                sequence [55].
                In this context, our data may further suggest that upon CRC progression, the tumor
                microenvironment changes in such a way that Enterobacteria are replaced by
                commensal-like species or bacteria with proposed probiotic properties that have
                increased access to and/or can more efficiently forage in the altered tumor
                microenvironment. The disappearance of CRC-driving pathogenic bacteria from advanced
                CRC tumor tissue may be analogous to what has been reported for Helicobacter
                    pylori during gastric cancer progression [56].
Altogether, our study provides an important first glimpse of the CRC-associated
                microbiome and indicates a highly dynamic relationship between intestinal bacteria
                and developing tumours. Nonetheless, many open questions need to be addressed in
                future studies, including deep microbiome analysis of extended groups of tumor
                samples from different disease stages, including adenomas and biopsies from a large
                set of non-cancer patients to serve as reference database. Furthermore, for
                diagnostic purposes it will be important to investigate how the local
                tumour-associated microbiome shifts relate to the fecal microbiota composition [57]. A more
                detailed analysis of CRC (meta-)genomes and bacterial transcriptomes is needed to
                pinpoint the genes that cause differential colonization in the tumor
                microenvironment and to better define high-risk microbial populations. Subsequently,
                high-risk and low-risk bacterial populations should be validated in (animal) models
                for sporadic CRC, and mechanisms of bacterial interference in CRC have to be
                unraveled in more detail. All-in-all, this sets the agenda for a new exciting era in
                colorectal cancer research, integrating microbiology and microbial ecology with
                tumor biology. This will lead us towards an increased understanding of the driving
                forces of CRC, as well as novel microbiome-related diagnostic tools and therapeutic
                interventions.

Supporting Information
Figure S1
RISA fingerprinting of CRC tissue and non-malignant adjacent mucosa. The
                        intergenic spacer region between the 16S and 23S rRNA genes was amplified
                        with conserved primer pairs (Table S1) and analyzed using an Agilent
                        Bioanalyser. Patient characteristics can be found in Table 1; off, non-malignant tissue; on,
                        tumor tissue.
(PDF)
Click here for additional data file.
Figure S2
A, Read lengths per sample, with
                            Xoff and Xon coming from off-tumor and on-tumor
                        samples in subject X, the data was derived from the read lengths
                        post-processing via the RDP pyropipeline. B,
                        Rarefraction curves for each sample, the sample key is the same as use for
                            Figure
                            S1. These curves were generated using MOTHUR, cut off values are
                        shown. C, Venn diagram for paired samples
                        generated using MOTHUR, each diagram shows the OTUs (at 0.03%
                        cut-off) shared and those unique to each sample from on and off tumor.
                                D, Principle component analysis of the
                        annotated 16S rRNA sequence data generated for on and off tumor samples of
                        each patient (A-F), was plotted as an 0.5x0.5 interval density
                        distribution. The color coding shows the natural logarithm of the densities
                        in each segment. Where there are significant differences (P<0.05) between
                        tumor tissue and adjacent off-tumor mucosa, a white cross is shown in that
                        segment. The taxonomic groups contributing to the most densely populated
                        segments are shown (and the numbers of sequences contributing are shown in
                        parentheses).
(PDF)
Click here for additional data file.
Figure S3
Taxonomic affiliation of the 16S rRNA gene reads for each paired sample set
                        from subjects
                            A-F
                        and the combined samples (G). The figures were
                        generated using MEGAN and show in which PHYLA (piecharts) and families
                        (barcharts) the main alterations of levels of reads are found. In the
                        barchart only families which were greater than 1% of the community
                        are shown.
(PDF)
Click here for additional data file.
Figure S4
Consistent biases in microbiota between the on- and off-tumor samples. The
                        overall consistency scores between +6 (green) and -6 (red)
                        reflects how consistently clades were enriched across six patients. Trees
                        were visualized with iTOL A, Consistent clades
                        derived from the EMBL annotation of SILVA sequences.
                                B, Consistent clades derived from the
                        RDP annotation of SILVA sequences. C,
                        Differential annotation depth of the SSU rRNA sequences in the SILVA
                        database by EMBL and RDP. Low annotation depth means little resolution: many
                        sequences are either well annotated by RDP (bottom right) or by EMBL (top
                        left).
(PDF)
Click here for additional data file.
Table S1
Primers used in this study.
(PDF)
Click here for additional data file.
Table S2
MOTHUR diversity indices of bacterial communities in samples on- and
                        off-tumor (Xon and Xoff, respectively).
(PDF)
Click here for additional data file.
Table S3
Genus level comparison generated with the RDP library compare tool. Values
                        indicate the number of 16S rRNA pyrosequencing reads that map to the listed
                        genus. Only significant differences are shown (P<0.05). A-F:
                        patients; Xoff: off-tumor tissue; Xon: on-tumor
                        tissue.
(PDF)
Click here for additional data file.
Table S4
Consistency scores for CRC associated microbiome shifts.
(XLS)
Click here for additional data file.
