[Abstract, Introduction, Methods, Results, Discussion, Mixed, Mixed, Mixed]

Integrin ?6A splice variant regulates proliferation and the Wnt/?-catenin pathway in human colorectal cancer cells. Summary Integrin a6Ab4 is up-regulated in colorectal cancers. Knockdown of a6A in adenocarcinoma cell lines revealed a sustained reduction of cell growth both in cellulo and in xenografts as well as a repression of a number of Wnt/b-catenin pathway end points.

IntroductionThe integrin superfamily is composed of the transmembrane receptors responsible for mediating epithelial-basement membrane interactions. Integrins are formed by the heterodimeric association of an a and a b subunit and, to date, 18 a and 8 b subunits have been identified, which can combine to form 24 distinct integrins (1). The existence of multiple splice variants and post-translational modification of most subunits increases the variety of integrins (2). These receptors can mediate intracellular signalling despite their lack of intrinsic kinase activity. Indeed, ligand binding (i.e. laminin, collagen and fibronectin) induces the recruitment of intracellular kinases and adaptor proteins via the cytoplasmic C-terminal domains of either integrin subunit, mediating intracellular signalling to regulate a large spectrum of cell processes including proliferation, adhesion, migration and apoptosis (3,4).Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the second leading cause of cancer death in North America (5) and accumulating studies confirm an important role for integrin receptors in human colorectal tumourigenesis (6-9). Interestingly, the a6 integrin subunit can heterodimerize with either b1 or b4 to form the a6b1 or a6b4 integrins but in the gut epithelium as well as in CRC, the a6 integrin subunit predominantly associates with b4 (10-12). Moreover, both the a6 and b4 integrin subunits appear to be over-expressed in primary tumours of the human colon (12-14) and CRC cell lines (12,13,15), suggesting an important role for this integrin in CRC progression (7,9). Although the b4 subunit exists as five splice variants, it is the b4A variant subunit that is predominantly expressed in the gut (11). We have previously described a cytosolic variant of b4A resulting from the proteolytic cleavage of the C-terminal domain (cdt), called b4cdt-, that is non-functional for adhesion to laminin and associated with normal intestinal proliferative epithelial cells but it is the wt form, b4cdt+, that is predominantly present in CRC and in all CRC cell lines studied (11,13). To date, signalization from b4 in cancer has been well characterized. For instance, outside-in signalling leads to phosphorylation of the cytoplasmic C-terminal domain of b4, recruitment of SHC/GRB2 and/or IRS1/IRS2 and downstream activation of the MAPK/ERK and PI3K/AKT pathways (16), thus regulating major cell processes involved in tumourigenesis (16-19).Although the majority of a6b4 functions in cancer have been attributed to the b4 subunit, recent evidence suggests that signalization events mediated by the a6 subunit can also regulate the processes involved in tumourigenesis including proliferation and metastasis (20-25). However, the a6 integrin subunit exists as two splice variants, a6A and a6B, generated by the alternative splicing of exon 25, resulting in the formation of two distinct cytoplasmic domains (26). The existence of two variants with distinct C-tails suggests that each may have a specific function in the regulation of cellular processes. In support of this, a study performed using two yeast hybrids has shown that the PDZ domain of each variant can interact with specific intracellular molecules (27,28). Furthermore, other studies have demonstrated that each variant initiates different intracellular signalling events, such as paxilin phosphorylation (29) and RAS-MEK-ERK activation (30). In human tissues, the a6A and a6B variant subunits display distinct patterns of expression (26) as for instance in the skin where a6A is exclusively associated with basal cells. Previous results from our laboratory have shown that in the normal human small intestine, the a6A variant is predominantly associated with proliferative cells in the glands, whereas the a6B variant is mainly localized in quiescent and differentiated cells in the villus epithelium (31). Although also detected in the normal colon, this pattern of expression is lost in primary tumours where a6A becomes ubiquitously expressed in all CRC cells (12), supporting the possibility that inclusion of the a6A subunit into a6b4 integrin generates a pro-proliferative integrin (7). In the context where deregulation of cell proliferation is one of the hallmarks of cancer and that the a6 subunit appears to be involved in the process (20-25), we propose that the pro-proliferative function of a6 is specifically mediated by its a6A splice variant in CRC.In the present study, we tested this hypothesis using a knockdown approach targeting the mature a6A messenger RNA (mRNA) and found that a6A ablation significantly reduced CRC cell proliferation both in vitro and in xenografts. Furthermore, we also found that this effect was accompanied by a decline in the Wnt/b-catenin signalling pathway.

Materials and methodsPrimary antibodies and materialsPrimary antibodies used for the detection of the a6A and a6B variants were anti-a6A [western blot (WB): 1/500, immunofluorescence (IF): 1/100] (1A10, Millipore, Etobicoke, Ontario) and anti-a6B (WB: 1/500, IF: 1/100) (6B4, Millipore). These antibodies were originally a generous gift from Dr A.Sonnenberg (Division of Cell Biology, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The Netherlands). Other primary antibodies used were anti-integrin b4 (WB: 1/5000, IF: 1/100) (3E1, Millipore), anti-integrin a6 (IF: 1/1000) (GOH3, Millipore), anti-b-actin (WB: 1/75 000) (C4, Millipore), anti-active-b-catenin (WB: 1/2500) (8E7, Millipore) recognizing the dephosphorylated form of b-catenin on Ser37 and Thr41 (sites of GSK3b phosphorylation), anti b-catenin (WB: 1/2500) (610153, BD Biosciences, Mississauga, Ontario), anti-DVL2 (WB: 1/2500) (30D2, Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA), anti-cytokeratin 18 (WB: 1/1 000 000) (CY-90, Sigma-Aldrich, Oakville, Ontario), anti-histone H1 (WB: 1/1000) (AE-4, Santa Cruz Biotechnologies, Santa Cruz, CA), anti-integrin b1 (WB: 1/1000) (Mab13, BD Biosciences), anti-GSK3b (WB: 1/5000) (27C10, Cell Signaling Technology) and anti-H3K27me3 (WB: 1/1000) (07-449, Millipore). The pharmacological inhibitor of GSK3b (SB216763, S3442, Sigma-Aldrich) was used at a final concentration of 20 uM. The protease inhibitor cocktail (P8340) was purchased from Sigma.Cell culture and generation of CRC cells knocked down for a6A subunit expressionThe CRC cell lines Caco-2/15 and T84 (polarized) as well as HT29 and DLD-1 (non-polarized) were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection (www.ATCC.org) and cultured as described (11-13). All cells were grown in an atmosphere of 95% air and 5% CO2 at 37degC. Colon cancer cells were plated at 60% confluence 24 h prior to infection with lentiviruses prepared with MISSION(r) shRNA (Sigma-Aldrich) plasmids for the human a6A integrin containing the shRNA sequence: 5'-CCG GCC TTT GGA CTG AAA GGA GAA ACT CGA GTT TCT CCT TTC AGT CCA AAG GTT TTT G. The negative control shGFP contained the sequence: 5': CCG GGT GGG CAT CAA AGA CGT GTT TCT CGA GAA ACA CGT CTT TGA TGC CCA CTT TTT G and shctl: 5': CCG GGT GGG CAT CAA AGA CGT GTT TCT CGA GAA ACA CGT CTT TGA TGC CCA CTT TTT G. At 3 days post-infection, stable cell lines were selected by adding 5-10 ug/ml puromycin to the culture medium (Qiagen, Mississauga, Ontario). Cultures were used after 14 days of selection.Growth curve assayStable cell populations of T84, Caco-2/15, HT29 and DLD-1 were seeded in 6-well plates at 2x105 cells/dish in their respective media. Cell number was measured, using a Z1 Coulter Counter (Beckman, Mississauga, Ontario).Cell proliferation assaysProliferation assays using 5-bromo-2-deoxyuridine (BrdU) incorporation were performed according to the manufacturer's instructions (Roche, Laval, Quebec) as described previously (12). All experiments were performed in triplicate and repeated three times.
In situ terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated deoxyuridine triphosphate nick-end labelling (ISEL) assaysAnalysis of apoptosis index was evaluated using the ApopTag(r) Plus Fluorescein In Situ Apoptosis Detection Kit (S7111, Millipore) and performed according to the manufacturer's instructions. Briefly, 5x104 cells were seeded onto serum-pretreated coverslips in a 12-well plate (Falcon) and allowed to adhere for 48h under normal culture conditions and processed for in situ terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated dUTP nick-end labeling (ISEL) ISEL assays. The percentage of apoptotic cells was evaluated by the number of positive ISEL cells over the total number of cells stained by 4',6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (x100). Cytochalasin D (Sigma-Aldrich) was added at 1 uM for a positive control of apoptosis.Nuclear extractsNuclear extracts were prepared using cells at 80% confluence. Briefly, cells were washed three times with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) 1x and harvested with 4ml PBS 1x. Cells were centrifuged at 3000 r.p.m. for 5 min at 4degC then rapidly resuspended in a hypotonic buffer (HB: 10 uM N-2-hydroxyethylpiperazine-N'-2-ethanesulfonic acid, 1.5 uM MgCl2, 3 uM KCl, 0.5 uM dithiothreitol and 1% protease inhibitor cocktail in bidistilled H2O) and centrifuged at 3000 r.p.m. for 5 min at 4degC. Supernatants were removed and cells were resuspended in HB for 10 min at 4degC. Cells were then homogenized with a micropestle and centrifuged for 15 min at 4degC. The supernatant was removed and cells were resuspended in low salt buffer (20 uM N-2-hydroxyethylpiperazine-N'-2-ethanesulfonic acid, 1.5 uM MgCl2, 6 uM KCl, 25% glycerol, 0.2 uM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid, 5 uM dithiothreitol and 1% protease inhibitor cocktail in bidistilled H2O) followed by resuspension in a high salt buffer (20 uM N-2-hydroxyethylpiperazine-N'-2-ethanesulfonic acid, 1.5 uM MgCl2, 0.4 M KCl, 25% glycerol, 0.2 uM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid, 5 uM dithiothreitol and 1% protease inhibitor cocktail in bidistilled H2O), shaken for 30 min at 4degC and centrifuged at 14 000 r.p.m. for 30 min at 4degC. The supernatants were solubilized 1:3 in 4X concentrated Laemmli buffer prior to loading and analysis for nuclear proteins by WB.Cellular fractionationSubcellular fractionation was performed using the Subcellular Proteome Extraction Kit (539790, Millipore) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Cells were allowed to grow 3 days prior to subcellular compartment extraction (cytosolic: F1; membrane: F2; nuclear: F3; cytoskeletal: F4). Enriched fractions were confirmed by WB for the detection of GSK3b (cytoplasmic soluble fraction), integrin b1 (membrane fraction), trimethylated lysine 27 on histone 3 (nuclear fraction) and keratin 18 (cytoskeletal fraction).Western blotWB analyses were performed on sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis gels under denaturing conditions as described previously using 50 ug of whole cell lysate per lane, except for a6A and a6B immunodetections, which were performed under non-denaturing conditions using 120 ug of whole cell lysate per lane (12,31). Primary antibodies were detected with horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibodies (anti-mouse, anti-rabbit, GE Healthcare--Amersham Bioscience, Baie d'Urfe, Quebec) and developed using the Immobilon Western(r) kit (Millipore).ImmunofluorescenceIF was performed as described previously (32). Briefly, 5x104 T84 cells were seeded onto serum-pretreated coverslips in a 12-well plate (Falcon), allowed to adhere for 48h under normal culture conditions and processed for IF experiments. For a6 and b4 staining, cells were fixed in 2% paraformaldehyde, non-specific sites were blocked for 1 h at room temperature with 5% Blotto-PBS (pH 7.4) and both primary and secondary antibodies were diluted in 5% Blotto-PBS (pH 7.4). For a6A and a6B staining, cells were fixed in MeOH and EtOH, respectively. Non-specific sites were blocked for 1 h at room temperature in a 2% bovine serum albumin solution in PBS (pH 7.4) and both primary and secondary antibodies were diluted in 2% bovine serum albumin-PBS (pH 7.4). Cells were treated with a 0.2% Triton X-100 solution for 5 min prior to antibody incubation. Primary antibodies were detected with Alexa Fluor 488 or 594 goat anti-mouse secondary antibodies (Invitrogen, A11017, A11032) and Alexa Fluor 488 goat anti-rat secondary antibody (Invitrogen, A11006).Transfections and luciferase assaysTOPflash and FOPflash reporter plasmids (Millipore) were transfected into CRC cell lines with Effectene transfection reagent (Qiagen) using the manufacturer's instructions. Firefly and renilla luciferase activities were measured using the dual luciferase reporter assay system (Promega, Madison, WI) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Briefly, each cell line was plated at 5x104 cells/well in 12-well plates. Cells were co-transfected with TOPflash or FOPflash reporter plasmids and the renilla luciferase expression plasmid (Promega) and treated with dimethyl sulfoxide or SB216763 for 48 h. Data were obtained by calculating the ratio of firefly/renilla luciferase expressions for the TOPflash and FOPflash reporter plasmids. The FOPflash ratio was subtracted from the TOPflash ratio. Data represent three separate experiments performed in triplicate.Human colorectal tissuesSamples of 97 CRC and paired normal tissues (at least 10cm from the tumour) were obtained from patients undergoing surgical resection without prior neoadjuvant therapy. Tissues were obtained after patients' written informed consent, according to a protocol approved by the Institutional Human Subject Review Board of the Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Sherbrooke. Diagnoses, staging and grading were performed by the pathologists of the Department of Pathology of the Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Sherbrooke.RNA extraction, reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction and quantitative PCRRNA extraction and reverse transcription were performed as described previously (33). For competitive PCR, conditions and primers used to co-amplify a6A and a6B have been described previously (31). For quantitative PCR (qPCR), primers used to amplify a6, RPLPO and B2M have been described previously (12,13,33). a6A was amplified using a PrimeTime assay (IDT, Coralville, IA) composed of primers with the sequences 5'-GATCCTTACAGCATGGTATCGG and 5'-AAGAGAGGCTTACTTCTGATGC and a double-quenched hydrolysis probe containing the 5' fluorophore FAM and the sequence 56-FAM/TCGTACCTA/ZEN/GAGCGTTTAAAGAATCCACAC/3IABkFQ. a6B was amplified using a PrimeTime assay (IDT) composed of primers with the sequences 5'ATT CTC GCT GGG ATC TTG ATG and 5'GAT CCT TAC AGC ATG GTA TCG G and a double-quenched hydrolysis probe containing the 5' fluorophore FAM and the sequence 56-FAM/TGG AAG TGT/ZEN/GGA TTC TTT AAA CGC TCT/3IABkFQ/. Other primers used were for LGR5--LGR5-F: 5'-TGC TCT TCA CCA ACT GCA TC and LGR5-R: 5'-CTC AGG CTC ACC AG ATC CTC; for CCD2--CCD2-F: 5'-TGG GGA AGT TGA AGT GGA AC and CCD2-R: 5'-TCA TCG ACG GTG GGT ACA T; for CCD1--CCD1-F: 5'-AAC TAC CTG GAC CGC TTC CT and CCD1-R: 5'-CCA CTT GAG CTT GTT CAC CA and for DVL2--DVL2-F: 5'-GCC TAT CCA GGT TCC TCC TC and DVL2-R: 5'-AGA GCC AGT CAA CCA CAT CC. qPCR was performed using an Mx3000P (Stratagene, Mississauga, Ontario) as described previously (33). Relative mRNA levels were established by normalization to a pool of cDNA and calculated according to the Pfaffl mathematical model (34).XenograftsFemale CD1 nu/nu mice were purchased from Charles River (Wilmington, MA). All experimental protocols were approved by the Ethics Committee for Animal Experimentation of the Universite de Sherbrooke. For tumour growth, a total of 2 x 106 cells suspended in 100 ul Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium were injected into the dorsal subcutaneous tissue of 5-week-old female CD1 nu/nu mice. After injection of sha6A and shctl T84, HT29 and DLD-1 cell populations, tumour volumes were determined by external measurement [V = (d
2 x D)/2] as soon as growing tumours became palpable and were followed until killing. At the time of killing, tumours were dissected and weighed. A portion of each tumour was used for mRNA extraction and subsequent qPCR analysis. Another portion was embedded in Optimum Cutting Temperature compound (Canemco-Marivac, Lakefield, Quebec), cut into 5-10 mm sections and stained with haematoxylin and eosin for histological analysis. Slide sections were viewed using an FSX100 Bio Imaging Navigator microscope (Olympus, Center Valley, PA).Data presentation and statistical analysesEach experiment was repeated at least three times and representative results were shown. Student's paired t-test and analysis of variance (ANOVA) using Bonferroni's multiple comparison test were used to analyse the results and data were considered to be significantly relevant at P <= 0.05 and are presented as mean +- SEM. Statistical calculations were performed using Prism 3.0 software (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA).

ResultsCorrelation between total a6 subunit and a6A variant expression in CRCWe have shown previously that a6B/a6A integrin subunit ratios were significantly reduced in a relatively small set of human CRC samples at the transcript level (12). In an attempt to extend these observations, the mRNA levels of total a6 as well as the individual a6A and a6B variants were analyzed by qPCR in 97 CRCs and their corresponding resection margins (RMs). The level of total a6 subunit mRNA was found to be increased in CRC samples compared with RMs by more than 2-fold, as well as that of a6A, whereas the level of a6B remained stable (Figure 1A). Moreover, a close correlation was observed between the levels of a6 and a6A mRNA (P <= 0.0001, Pearson r = 0.588) in human CRC (Figure 1B). When each sample was analyzed individually, the expression of a6A in CRC compared with corresponding RMs was found to be increased in 69 patients, similar in 16 patients and reduced in 12 patients. Taking into consideration that significant levels of a6A are expressed in the crypt of the normal colonic mucosa of the RM, these results confirm that a large proportion of CRC cells express significant levels of a6A. Furthermore, up-regulation of a6A was observed for all tumour stages or grades (Supplementary Figure 1, available at Carcinogenesis Online) although the presence of somatic mutations of adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) had no impact on a6A expression (data not shown). Taken together, these data confirm a sustained up-regulation of the a6A splice variant in human CRC.Fig. 1.Expression of the a6 integrin subunit in human CRCs. (A) qPCR analysis of a6, a6A and a6B transcript levels in 97 primary colorectal tumours (Tu) relative to their matched RMs. Data were normalized using B2M levels as the reference gene. ***P <= 0.001. (B) Graph showing the correlation between a6 and a6A transcript expression in the 97 primary colorectal tumours. Pearson r = 0.588, P <= 0.0001.Specific a6A knockdown in CRC cellsTo investigate the involvement of the a6A variant in CRC cell behaviour, four well-characterized CRC cell lines--Caco-2/15, DLD-1, T84 and HT29 cells--were infected with an shRNA targeting the a6A variant. The a6A shRNA was designed in order to recognize a unique sequence of the short exon 25 (119pb) specific to the a6A mRNA transcript. Specificity of knockdown of a6A was first confirmed by competitive PCR using primers that amplify both variants of a6. The results revealed a decrease in a6A variant mRNA expression in sha6A versus shctl-treated CRC cells in all four cell lines tested (Figure 2A). Further analysis by qPCR revealed that knocking down a6A led to a decrease of ~50% of total a6 mRNA levels (Figure 2B). Analysis of splice variants showed an 80-90% decrease in a6A transcript levels in sha6A cells compared with controls, without affecting mRNA levels of a6B (Figure 2B). WB analysis of a6A and a6B performed to extend our observations at the protein level confirmed the specific abolition of the a6A variant, without significantly affecting a6B in all CRC cell lines (Figure 2C).Fig. 2.Knockdown of the a6A subunit in human CRC cells. (A) Representative gel showing the results of a competitive reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction for the detection of a6A and a6B transcripts in stably expressing shctl and sha6A Caco-2/15, DLD-1, T84 and HT29 cells. (B) qPCR using probes specific for total a6, a6A and a6B confirming the specificity of abolition of a6A variant expression by sha6A relative to shctrl; *P <= 0.05, **P <= 0.01, ANOVA, n = 3. (C) Representative WB for detection of a6A and a6B subunits in shctl- and sha6A-infected Caco-2/15, DLD-1, T84 and HT29 cells. Keratin 18 (K18) was used as loading control. Densiometric analysis of a6A and a6B protein levels in shctl- versus sha6A-infected cell populations; *P <= 0.05, **P <= 0.01, t-test, n = 3.a6A knockdown does not affect the intracellular localization of a6BIn order to verify the localization of a6B in sha6A cells, we first used IF staining on T84 cells, which display hemidesmosomes. Co-staining using a rat anti-a6 antibody and a mouse anti-b4 antibody showed that the a6 integrin subunits co-localize with the b4 subunit in both shctl (Supplementary Figure 2A-C, available at Carcinogenesis Online) and sha6A cells (Supplementary Figure 2D-F, available at Carcinogenesis Online) with a typical punctuated hemidesmosome-like staining pattern. As expected, the relative intensity of staining for both integrin subunits was lower in sha6A cells. Furthermore, using a6 variant-specific antibodies, a significant reduction of the a6A staining observed in shctl cells (Supplementary Figure 2G, available at Carcinogenesis Online) was noted in sha6A cells (Supplementary Figure 2H, available at Carcinogenesis Online), whereas the a6B staining remained comparable between shctl and sha6A cells (Supplementary Figure 2I and J, available at Carcinogenesis Online). These results suggested that abolition of a6A does not alter the distribution of a6B. In order to confirm this observation, cell subfractionation was performed on shctl and sha6A DLD-1 cells, which do not display organized hemidesmosomes. WB analysis confirmed that the membrane localization of a6B was not altered by the ablation of a6A expression (Supplementary Figure 3, F2, available at Carcinogenesis Online). As expected, a decrease in the b4 integrin was observed relative to the b1 integrin. Taken together, these two sets of observations indicate that a6A knockdown has no significant effect on a6B expression and localization.a6A regulates cell proliferationAs the a6 integrin subunit was reported to be involved in cell proliferation (20,21), we further investigated if this function could be attributed to the a6A splice variant. Therefore, the involvement of the a6A variant in cancer cell growth was first assessed by establishing a growth curve using CRC cell populations knocked down for a6A, but expressing a6B, in vitro. As shown in Figure 3A, a significant reduction in cell number was observed throughout the culture beginning as early as 2 days post-seeding for T84, HT29 and DLD-1 sha6A cells in comparison with shctl cells and at 4 days for Caco-2/15 sha6A cells. Overall, abolition of the a6A subunit led to a significant and sustained reduction of the growth rate in all CRC cells tested.Fig. 3.Knocked down a6A splice variant decreases cell proliferation. (A) Cell counts over a 3-6 day period after the seeding of Caco-2/15, DLD-1, T84 and HT29 stably expressing sha6A or shctl. Cells were counted at the indicated times. (B) BrdU labelling assay in Caco-2/15, DLD-1, T84 and HT29 sha6A and shctl cells at 2 days post-seeding. (C) ISEL assay in Caco-2/15, DLD-1, T84 and HT29 sha6A and shctl cells at 2 days post-seeding. Cytochalasin D (CD)-treated cells were used as positive control for apoptosis. Statistical analysis between shctrl and sha6A: *P <= 0.05, **P <= 0.01, ***P <= 0.001, t-test, n = 3.To confirm that the decrease in cell number was the result of a specific reduction in cell proliferation, all cell lines were subjected to BrdU incorporation and ISEL assays. A significant reduction in cells entering S-phase was revealed by BrdU incorporation for the four sha6A cell lines relative to their corresponding shctl cells (Figure 3B), while at the same time, ISEL experiments showed that the apoptotic index was negligible in all colorectal cell lines (Figure 3C). These results confirm the pro-proliferative function of the a6A variant on human CRC cells.a6A variant knockdown reduces tumour growth in xenograftsThe capacity of a6A knockdown cells to form tumours in vivo was next evaluated by subcutaneous injection of nude mice with T84, HT29 and DLD-1 cells. Caco-2/15 cells were not included in this assay because of the long latency period required to observe tumour formation in nude mice with this cell line. Interestingly, we found that the latency period for the detection of palpable tumours was significantly delayed for T84/sha6A cells compared with T84/shctl (36 days versus 12 days) (Figure 4A), whereas this was not so for HT29 and DLD-1 cells. However, abolition of a6A in T84 and HT29 strongly diminished their growth capacity as tumours in nude mice (Figure 4A and B), resulting in a significant reduction of the tumour weight at the time of the killing (Figure 4C and D). The decrease in proliferation rate observed in DLD-1 sha6A cells in vitro was not transposed into a significant reduction in tumour growth and weight (data not shown). However, histological haematoxylin and eosin analysis showed that DLD-1 shctl xenograft tumours displayed large necrosis/oedema regions, a feature not observed in DLD-1 sha6A xenograft tumours (Figure 4E). This observation could explain the lack of difference in tumour size development observed, despite the decrease in proliferation in DLD-1 sha6A cells. On the other hand, no histological difference was observed between shctl and sha6A xenograft tumours from T84 and HT29 cells (Figure 4E). As shown in Figure 4F, qPCR analysis of a6A and a6B in tumours confirmed that the a6A knockdown is retained in HT29 and DLD-1 and tends to be retained in T84 xenogafts even after 50 days (P < 0.01 for HT29 and DLD-1; P < 0.08 for T84). Taken together, these results demonstrate that the a6A variant can regulate tumour growth in at least a subset of CRC cell lines in xenografts, confirming the pro-proliferative effect of the a6A variant.Fig. 4.Knockdown of a6A variant in human CRC cells inhibits their growth in xenografts. (A and B) Tumour growth (mm3) following subcutaneous injection of 2x106 T84 and HT29 stably expressing sha6A and shctl cells into nude mice. Tumour volumes were determined by external measurement [V = (d
2 x D)/2]. (C and D) Weight (g) of tumours from T84 and HT29 shctl and sha6A cells at the time of killing. Statistical analysis between shctrl and sha6A: *P <= 0.05, **P <= 0.01, t-test, n = 4. (E) Representative haematoxylin and eosin staining images for T84, HT29 and DLD-1 shctl and sha6A xenograft tumours. Scale bars = 200 mm for main panels and 50 mm for inserts. Hash symbols denote necrosis/oedema regions. (F) qPCR analyses for the expression of a6A and a6B transcript levels in xenograft tumours from T84, HT29 and DLD-1 shctl and sha6A cells. Data are expressed by a6A normalized to a6B levels. **P <= 0.01, SS
P = 0.0783, t-test, n = 4.a6A knockdown regulates the Wnt/b-catenin pathwayThe Wnt/b-catenin pathway is one of the most important regulators of cell proliferation in various systems and is often strongly deregulated in human CRC (35,36), thus suggesting a possible link between a6A expression and Wnt/b-catenin activity in CRC cells. Wnt/b-catenin activity was first evaluated by determining the level of GSK3b phosphorylation of b-catenin at ser37/thr41 using an active b-catenin antibody. WB analyses of whole cell lysates showed a statistically significant decrease in the levels of active b-catenin in all sha6A cell lines relative to total b-catenin compared with shctl cells (Figure 5A). This overall decrease was also reflected in WB analyses of nuclear extracts, where b-catenin was reduced in a6A knockdown Caco-2/15, DLD-1 and T84 (Figure 5B). These results suggest that in these CRC cells, depletion of the a6A integrin variant interferes with the Wnt/b-catenin pathway by enhancing the phosphorylation of b-catenin by GSK3b, targeting it to proteasome degradation and consequently reducing its accumulation in the nucleus.Fig. 5.Regulation of the Wnt/b-catenin pathway by the a6A variant subunit. Representative WB and graph of the densiometric analysis for the detection of active b-catenin and total b-catenin in the whole cell extract (A) and b-catenin in nuclear extracts (B). b-Actin served as loading control in cell extracts and histone H1 for nuclear extracts. Statistical analysis between shctrl and sha6A: *P <= 0.05, **P <= 0.01, t-test, n = 3. (C) TOPflash assay of the response of b-catenin/TCF4 promotor activity in the a6A variant knocked down cell lines and their corresponding shctrl. Results showed the net luciferase/renilla ratio (Topflash - FOPflash). Statistical analysis between shctrl and sha6A: *P <= 0.05, **P <= 0.01, t-test, n = 3.To evaluate the functional significance of reduced b-catenin levels, the activity of the Wnt/b-catenin pathway was further analyzed by the luciferase assay using a responsive b-catenin/TCF4/LEF reporter plasmid (TOPflash). As shown in Figure 5C, a sharp decrease in TOPflash activity was observed in Caco-2/15, DLD-1 and T84 sha6A cells compared with shctl. In our hands, HT29 cells displayed a below-detection level of TOPflash activity compared with the other cell lines.Inhibition of GSK3b rescues Wnt/b-catenin pathwayTo further investigate the possible contribution of GSK3b to a6A-mediated b-catenin activation, we evaluated the effect of GSK3b inhibition on the rescue of responsive b-catenin/TCF4/LEF reporter plasmid activity and target gene expression in a6A knocked down T84 cells. As shown in Figure 6, we found that the pharmacological inhibition of GSK3b with SB21673 led to a significant stimulation of TOPflash activity in both shctl and sha6A cells (Figure 6A). Moreover, GSK3b inhibition stimulated TOPflash activity to the same level in both shctl and sha6A cells. To further extend these observations, the effect of a6A knockdown and GSK3b inhibition on Wnt/b-catenin target gene expression was analyzed by qPCR. We chose to investigate LGR5, CCD1 and CCD2, three well-documented target genes of the Wnt/b-catenin pathway in the intestine (37,38). First, sha6A cells were found to display a significant reduction of mRNA levels for LGR5 and CCD2 relative to shctl cells (Figure 6B), confirming the inhibition of Wnt/b-catenin transcriptional activity on these two target genes. GSK3b inhibition in sha6A cells resulted in a significant stimulation of LGR5 and CCD2 mRNA expression (Figure 6B). When both shctl and sha6A cells treated with the GSK3b inhibitor were compared, LGR5 mRNA expression was still significantly lower in sha6A cells than in shctl cells, whereas CCD2 mRNA expression was similar (Figure 6B), suggesting at least a partial rescue. No significant change in CCD1 mRNA expression was observed under these conditions (data not shown). These results suggest a role for the a6A integrin subunit in the control of Wnt/b-catenin activity and some of its target genes through GSK3b, which in turn may regulate CRC proliferation.Fig. 6.Regulation of the Wnt/b-catenin pathway. (A and B) Inhibition of GSK3b rescues Wnt/b-catenin activity. (A) Response of b-catenin/TCF4 promotor activity in a6A knocked down T84 cells and controls +- SB216763. Statistical analysis between shctrl and sha6A: **P <= 0.001; statistical analysis between - versus + SB216763: $$
P <= 0.001; ANOVA, n = 3. (B) qPCR analysis for the expression of LGR5 and CCD2 transcript levels in shctl and sha6A cells. T84 cells were treated for 24h +- SB216763 prior to analysis. Data were normalized to RPLPO as reference gene. Statistical analysis between untreated shctrl and sha6A: **P <= 0.001; statistical analysis between SB216763-treated shctrl and sha6A: ##
P <= 0.001; statistical analysis between - versus + SB216763: $
P <= 0.05, $$
P <= 0.001; ANOVA, n = 3. (C and D) Knockdown of a6A reduces DVL2 protein levels in the four cell lines tested. (C) Representative WB and graph of the densiometric analysis of the detection of DVL2 protein levels in shctl and sha6A cells. Statistical analysis between untreated shctrl and sha6A: *P <= 0.05, ***P <= 0.0001, t-test, n = 3. (D) qPCR analysis for the expression of DVL2 transcript levels in shctl and sha6A cells. Data were normalized to RPLPO levels. (E) Working model for the involvement of the a6Ab4 integrin in the regulation of the Wnt/b-catenin pathway. (Left) The a6Ab4 integrin is over-expressed in CRC. When present, a6A regulates positively DVL2 at the protein level. DVL2, which inhibits GSK3b-mediated b-catenin phosphorylation, enhances b-catenin stability and translocation into the nucleus for the activation of the transcription of specific target genes involved in cell proliferation. (Right) Knockdown of the a6A subunit in CRC cells results in a decrease in DVL2 levels, thus allowing b-catenin phosphorylation by GSK3b. b-Catenin being targeted to degradation is no longer translocated to the nucleus resulting in repression of the transcription of Wnt/b-catenin-specific target genes. In this context, pharmacological inhibition of GSK3b with SB216763 restores Wnt/b-catenin pathway activity by bypassing the regulation of DVL2 by the a6A integrin subunit. The '?' box denotes a still unknown mechanism by which a6A could be involved in the repression of key proteins regulating DVL2 degradation. Pathways/molecules activated are in black, whereas those inhibited are in grey.Down-regulation of DVL2The promoting effect of a6A on the expression of the active/nuclear form of b-catenin and the fact that inhibition of GSK3b could rescue the activity of the Wnt/b-catenin pathway suggest that a6A could interfere with a signalling event upstream to GSK3b. Thus, we investigated the possibility that a6A could act through the main GSK3b regulator, DVL2 (39). Interestingly, WB analyses of whole cell lysates revealed that knockdown of a6A led to a significant decrease in the protein levels of DVL2 in all four cell lines tested (Figure 6C) although its transcript levels were not affected (Figure 6D), suggesting that integrin a6Ab4 regulates the Wnt/b-catenin pathway through DVL2.

DiscussionOver the past several years, there has been an increase in evidence showing that integrin receptors can have important functions in various steps of cancer progression, as main modulators of cell survival, invasion, migration and proliferation (6-9,19,24). Moreover, in cancer, although integrins can be mutated, they are more often found to be regulated at the level of expression and constitutively activated in lipid rafts (1,4,6) as observed for the a6b4 integrin in CRC (12). Up-regulation of the a6 integrin subunit is not restricted to CRC, as other cancer types such as breast cancer and glioblastoma have been shown to express high levels of a6, which correlates with poor survival (21,25). However, the integrin a6 subunit is expressed in the form of a6A and a6B variants in most tissues (26) although each variant may mediate distinct cell functions (27-31). In the human colon, the a6B variant has been detected in the quiescent cells of the surface epithelium, whereas the a6A variant has been found to be associated with the proliferative cells in the normal crypts and in colorectal primary tumours (12). In this study, we found that the overall increase of a6 subunit found in CRC occurs almost exclusively under its a6A splice variant form. More importantly, we also identified specific functions of the a6A variant as a pro-proliferative component for CRC cells and a regulator of the Wnt/b-catenin pathway.Alternative splicing is a process by which exons are excluded/included into the mRNA, which allows for a considerable increase in protein diversity. Numerous studies have shown that alternative splicing is involved in the generation of pro-tumoural variants in cancer (40). Herein, we demonstrated that the inclusion of exon 25 during a6 integrin pre-mRNA processing is favoured in CRC and leads to the formation of a pro-proliferative variant of the a6 subunit, a6A. Interestingly, this integrin seems to have a common effect on CRC cells, since all four tested CRC cell lines in which a6A was knocked down showed a reduction in in vitro cell proliferation and a decrease in S-phase entry. A reduction in tumour growth in xenografts was also observed. Interestingly, the reduction of cell proliferation and/or tumour growth of mammary carcinoma cells, MCF7 breast cancer cells, glioblastoma cells and human liposarcoma cells has been reported previously following the knockdown of a6 integrin subunit expression (20,21,23,41). However, this is the first time that such pro-proliferative and pro-tumoural growth mediated by the a6 integrin subunit can be specifically attributed to one of its variants, a6A.How the a6A(b4) integrin specifically regulates the Wnt/b-catenin pathway to modulate cell proliferation remains to be determined. Integrins interact with scaffold and kinase proteins to generate intracellular signalling events. Since a6A and a6B differ only by their cytoplasmic domains, the pro-proliferative function of the a6A variant could be attributed to the recruitment of and/or interaction with specific cytoplasmic partners. For instance, it has been reported that a6A can interact with MSS4 and a6B with BIN1 via their GFFKR motif (28). MSS4 has been found to act as a regulator of the stress response and apoptosis (42), whereas BIN1 has been characterized as a tumour suppressor through its strong ability to inhibit c-MYC transcriptional activity (43). On the other hand, GIPC, a glut1-binding protein, has been found to bind to the type I PDZ domains of both a6A and a6B, the interaction being stronger on a6A (27). Incidentally, an small interfering RNA-targeting GIPC has been found to inhibit pancreatic cancer growth in an orthotopic mouse model (44).The Wnt pathway has been recognized as the dominant force behind the proliferative activity of the intestinal epithelium both in its physiological state and in CRC (45), thus suggesting a possible relation between the pro-proliferative a6A(b4) integrin and the activation of the Wnt/b-catenin pathway in both normal colonic crypts and in CRC. In normal crypt cells, the Wnt/b-catenin pathway is mainly modulated by the Wnt ligands of the stem cell niche (45). In CRCs, Wnt activation mainly occurs through mutation of the APC gene (35,46), which regulates b-catenin phosphorylation, thus favouring the accumulation of b-catenin in the nucleus, which after binding with T-cell factor results in the transcriptional activation of pro-proliferative target genes (47). However, it has been established that a number of mutations allow the retention of APC function and regulation of the activity of b-catenin in CRC cells despite mutation in APC (35,46,48). In agreement with these findings, herein using CRC cell lines that harbour various APC mutations (46), we demonstrated that abolition of a6A expression has a significant impact on a series of end points used to monitor the Wnt/b-catenin pathway. Indeed, based on the observations that down-regulation of a6A levels results in a reduction of the relative amounts of both active (evaluated as the non-GSK3b phosphorylated form) and nuclear b-catenin, whereas the pharmacological inhibition of GSK3b restored the activity of the Wnt/b-catenin pathway as evaluated by TOPflash assays and the modulation of specific target genes including LGR5 and CCD2, we suggest that a6A interferes with the activity of GSK3b. Interestingly, the expression of DVL2, which is recruited to the Wnt receptor complex upon ligand activation and acts on the activation of Wnt/b-catenin signalling by preventing constitutive proteolytic destruction of b-catenin (39), was significantly diminished at the protein level in a6A knocked down CRC cells, suggesting that the a6Ab4 integrin acts upstream from GSK3b. The mechanism still remains to be elucidated, but it is noteworthy that selective degradation pathways involving autophagy and prickle-1-dependent proteasomes have been reported previously for DVL. Indeed, during starvation-induced autophagy, the E3 ubiquitin ligase Von Hippel-Lindau protein tumour suppressor (pVHL) was shown to mediate DVL ubiquitination and its recognition by p62/SQSTM1, targeting it for selective autophagy (49). On the other hand, prickle-1, a planar cell polarity protein, can interact directly with DVL to mediate its ubiquitination and subsequent proteasome degradation via its destruction box (D-box) motif (50). Thus, via their regulatory functions on DVL degradation, pVHL and prickle-1 could negatively regulate Wnt/b-catenin activity.In conclusion, this study identified for the first time a specific cell function for the a6A splice variant. Our results suggest that a6A(b4) regulates cell proliferation and the Wnt/b-catenin pathway through DVL2/GSK3b (Figure 6E). However, the a6A cytoplasmic-associated protein responsible for this mechanism remains to be elucidated, as well as the molecular mechanisms responsible for the increase of a6A in CRC cells.

Supplementary material
Supplementary Figures 1-3 can be found at http://carcin.oxford journals.org/

Funding
Canadian Institutes of Health Research (MOP-97836 to J.-F.B., CTP-82942 to CRC biobank).

Supplementary Material
Supplementary Data
