[Abstract, Methods, Results, Discussion]

Membrane transport proteins in human melanoma: associations with tumour aggressiveness and metastasis. Background: Malignant melanoma, generally described as incurable, is notoriously refractory to chemotherapy. The mechanisms contributing to this have not yet been defined and the contributions of drug efflux pumps, implicated in chemo-resistance of many other cancer types, have not been extensively investigated in melanoma.   Methods: In this study, expression of multi-drug resistant (MDR1/P-gp and MRP-1) proteins was examined, by immunohistochemistry, in archival specimens from 134 melanoma patients. This included 92 primary tumours and 42 metastases.   Results: On assessing all specimens, MRP-1 and MDR1/P-gp expression was found to be common, with the majority (81%) of melanomas expressing at least one of these efflux pumps. Although there is significant association between expression of these pumps (P=0.007), MRP-1 was found to be the predominant (67% of cases) form detected. kh2 analysis showed significant associations between expression of MRP-1 and/or MDR1/P-gp and the aggressive nature of this disease specifically increased Breslow's depth, Clark's level and spread to lymph nodes. This association with aggressiveness and spread is further supported by the observation that a significantly higher percentage of metastases, than primary tumours, express MRP-1 (91% vs 57% P<0.0001) and MDR1/P-gp (74% vs 50% P=0.010).   Conclusion: The predominant expression of these pumps and, in particular, MRP-1 suggests that they may be important contributors to the inherent aggressive and resistant nature of malignant melanoma.

Materials and methods
Patients
The patient group studied comprised 134 consenting patients with malignant melanoma. All patients were diagnosed at St Vincent's University Hospital (SVUH), Dublin, between 1975 and 2002 and approval to conduct this study was granted by the SVUH Ethics Committee. Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded material was available for all patients. Representative 4 mm sections of tissue blocks were cut using a microtome, mounted onto poly-l-lysine-coated slides and dried overnight at 37 degC. Slides were stored at room temperature until required.
Immunohistochemistry
All steps were performed at room temperature unless otherwise indicated. Tissue sections were dewaxed in xylene (2 x 5 min), rehydrated in grading alcohols 100, 90 and 70% (2 x 3 min each), and placed in Tris Buffered Saline (TBS/0.05% Tween-20). Endogenous Peroxidase activity was quenched by placing tissue sections in 3% (v/v) H2O2/distilled water for 5-6 min. All slides were blocked for non-specific staining with 20% normal rabbit serum (Dako, Glostrup, Denmark, X-902)TBS for 20 min. Primary antibodies were applied to each specimen. Specifically, anti-MDR1/P-gp clone 6/1C ascites (which we developed and previously extensively characterised as specific for MDR1P-gp; Moran et al, 1997) were diluted 1:40 in TBS/0.05% Tween-20. Anti-MRP-1 PA28(6) antibody, (which we similarly developed and extensively characterised as specific for MRP-1; (Connolly et al, 2001)) was applied as a neat supernatant. Primary antibodies were incubated overnight at 4 degC. Samples were then washed (3 x 5 min) with TBS/0.05% Tween-20, followed by 30 min incubation with biotinylated secondary antibody diluted in TBS/0.05% Tween-20. Finally, following another 3 x 5 min. wash step, Vector SG substrate for peroxidase (Vector Laboratories, Peterborough, UK, SK-4700) was applied for approx. 10 min. All slides were washed (3 x 5 min.) in TBS/0.05% Tween-20. Tissue sections were then lightly counter-stained with nuclear fast red (Vector Laboratories, H-3403).
Following this, slides were dehydrated in 70, 90 and 100% grading alcohols (2 x 3 min.). Samples were then cleared in xylene and mounted in DPX (BDH, London UK). Positive control, normal kidney and lung tissue sections (using the same experimental conditions), and negative control samples (in which the primary antibody was replaced by 1 x TBS/0.05% Tween-20) were included in all experiments.
Immunohistochemical scoring
MRP-1 and MDR1/P-gp immunohistochemical staining was scored (by the Consultant Pathologist, Prof. Susan Kennedy) according to the percentage of cells showing specific immunoreactivity. A semi-quantitative measurement was used in which the overall positivity of the tumour was assessed and a score of 1+ was given if up to 25% of cells showed MRP-1 or MDR1/P-gp positive staining, as relevant; a score of 2+ was given if 25-<50% cells showed positive staining; a score of 3+, if 50-<75% of cells showed positive staining; and a score of 4+, if 75% of cells showed positive staining. Scores of 1 were considered as negative; scores > 1 were considered positive.
Statistical analysis
Statistical analyses of the results were performed using SPSS 16.0 and InStat software packages. Descriptive statistics were used to summarise patient characteristics, and statistical analysis of the results was performed using Pearson's kh2 test to investigate relationships between MDR1/P-gp and MRP-1 expression and clinicopathological and histopathological findings. Kaplan-Meier survival curves were established and were subsequently checked using the log-rank, Breslow and Tarone-ware tests (P-values represent log-rank, unless otherwise indicated) to assess the prognostic significance of MDR1/P-gp and MRP-1 protein expression. The data were analysed as a whole and as primary and metastases cohorts, and, where relevant, the data were also censored at 5 years. A value of P <0.05 was considered to be statistically significant.

Results
Patient characteristics
This study involved analysis of tumours from 134 patients with metastatic melanoma. Eighty-three of the patients were female; 51 were male. The patients' age ranged between 22 and 104 years at the time of diagnosis (median age=59 years). A total of 92 of the specimens available for analysis were primary tumours; 42 were secondary metastases. Further clinical characteristics of the patients are summarised in Table 1.
MDR1P-gp expression
MDR1/P-gp specific staining was observed in 57.5% (77 of 134) of the melanoma specimens analysed (a representative MDR1/P-gp positive tumour is shown in Figure 1A). Specific staining was localised to cell membrane/cytoplasm. Approximately 43% of tumours did not express MDR1/P-gp protein. MDR1/P-gp expression in primary and metastatic tumours, when analysed as separate cohorts, was 50 and 73.8%, respectively.
MRP-1 expression
MRP-1-specific staining was observed in 67.2% (90 per 134) of the tumours analysed ((Figure 1B) illustrates a typical example). In all 33% of all tumours did not express MRP-1 protein. Independent assessment of the primary tumours and metastases indicated MRP-1 to be detected in 56.5 and 90.5% of cases, respectively.
MDR1/P-gp and MRP-1 co-expression
The expressions of MDR1/P-gp and MRP-1 proteins were significantly associated (P=0.007). The majority (80.6%) of melanomas expressed at least one of the efflux pumps analysed; 44% expressed both, while only 19.4% expressed neither MDR1/P-gp nor MRP-1 proteins (see Table 2a). For the primary tumour cohort alone, as summarised in Table 2b, approximately 73% of cases expressed at least one of these pumps, 27% had neither MDR1/P-gp nor MRP-1, while 34% expressed both proteins. Table 2c indicates that the majority (97.6%) of the metastatic specimens expressed MDR1/P-gp and/or MRP-1; 67% had both. Almost a quarter (23.8%) of metastatic tumours had MRP-1, but lacked MDR1/P-gp expression, whereas only 7% expressed MDR1/P-gp alone.
Overall, as shown in Table 3, a direct comparison of MDR1/P-gp and MRP-1 efflux pump expression in the primary vs metastatic specimens indicated a significantly higher percentage of metastatic tumours, when compared with primary tumours, expressed MDR1/P-gp (primary 50% metastases 74% P=0.010) and MRP-1 (primary 57% metastases 91% P0.0001), with MRP-1 being the most prevalent efflux pump in these specimens.
MDR1/P-gp and MRP-1 expression in relation to clinicopathological features
Using kh2 analysis of the 134 patients as a whole (summarised in Table 4), MDR1/P-gp expression was found to be significantly (P=0.013) associated with lymph node positivity and tended to be associated with increased Breslow's depth; however, the latter case, showed statistical significance (P=0.052). MRP-1 expression was also significantly associated with spread to the lymph nodes (P<0.0005) and with more extensive invasion of the melanoma, i.e., when comparing MRP-1 expression in specimens with Clark's level II, III and IV vs Clark's level V; P=0.032 (incidentally, comparison of MRP-1 expression in those specimens with Clark's levels II and III with that in specimens with Clark's levels IV and V also supported the association between MRP-1 expression and increasing stages of disease; (although NS, P=0.051)).
Assessing the expression of these efflux pumps in the cohort of primary tumours alone (Table 5) showed similar trends to those seen when evaluating all 134 cases, that is, MDR1/P-gp expression being associated with spread to the lymph nodes (P=0.049) and increasing Breslow's depth (although NS, P=0.056), with MRP-1 expression being significantly associated with increasing Clark's level (P=0.023).
In relation to the metastases cohort alone, as the majority of these specimens expressed MRP-1 (~91%) and MDR1/P-gp (~74%), seeking association with clinicopathological factors is not relevant here.

Discussion
Malignant melanoma is one of the most challenging cancers to treat, resulting in highest per-death loss of years of potential life expectancy with the exception of adult leukaemia (Seetharamu et al, 2009). Unfortunately, the effectiveness of chemotherapeutic regimes evaluated in this cancer type is compromised and very limited, owing to the yet undefined highly resistant nature of this cancer.
Drug efflux pumps, MDR1/P-gp and MRP-1, have been associated with chemo-resistance in a number of cancer types. Studies of drug efflux pumps in melanoma have, however, been very limited to date. As outlined previously, studies of melanoma cell line models have resulted in conflicting results, some suggesting a role for MRP-1 (Berger et al, 1997), while others propose MDR1/P-gp to be potentially of more relevance (Molinari et al, 2000; Colone et al, 2008). Both earlier studies of melanoma tissue specimens (from 8 and 58 patients, evaluating mRNAs and proteins, respectively) reported MRP-1, but generally not MDR P-gp, expression (Schadendorf et al, 1995; Ichihashi and Kitajima, 2001). Although those studies were important in highlighting the potential relevance of a drug efflux pump (namely, MRP-1) in melanoma, the numbers of specimens included were very limited. Furthermore, associations with patients' clinical characteristics were not investigated.
Here, in this more extensive study of 134 melanoma specimens, in agreement with the studies by Schadendorf et al (1995), we report MRP-1 protein to be typically expressed in melanoma. However, whereas Schadendorf et al (1995) reported the prevalence of expression to be the same in primary tumours and metastases, we observed that significantly higher percentages of metastatic specimens, compared with primary tumours, express MRP-1. Furthermore, in contrast to the work reported by Schadendorf et al (1995) in which MDR1/P-gp was detected in only 1 of 21 primary specimens and was absent from metastases, we detected MDR1/P-gp in more than half of the specimens analysed. As for MRP-1, expression of MDR1/P-gp was significantly more frequent in metastases compared with primary tumours. The discrepancies between our work and that reported by Schadendorf et al (1995) may, at least partly, be related to the larger cohort of specimens to which we had access in our analysis. We propose that such large studies could potentially contribute to more clinically relevant results.
This, we believe, is the first study evaluating potential associations between MDR1/P-gp and/or MRP-1 expression and melanoma patients' clinicopathological characteristics. Although we found no significant association between either the presence of either efflux pump or the age and gender of the patients, we identified that expression of these pumps tended to be associated with the more aggressive nature of melanoma. Specifically, MRP-1 expression was significantly associated with tumours classified as having a Clark's level of V (i.e., invading the subcutaneous fat, instead of being limited to the epidermal or dermal layers of the skin). Although statistical significance was not reached, MDR1/P-gp expression tended to be more strongly associated with tumours having a staging Breslow's thickness of >4 mm which, according to the AJCC guidelines, is prognostic of a 5-year. survival of approximately 50% (compared with 95-100% for <1 mm; 80-95% for 1-2 mm; and 60-80% for 2.1-4 mm). Furthermore, we established that both MRP-1 and MDR1/P-gp expression are significantly associated with spread of cancer to the lymph nodes. The observed associations between expression of these efflux pumps and the more aggressive phenotype of melanoma, together with the significantly higher prevalence of these pumps (MRP-1, in particular) in metastases compared with primary specimens, suggests that MRP-1 and MDR1/P-gp may contribute, at least to some extent, to the incurable nature of malignant melanoma.
In conclusion, this study indicates that expression of drug efflux pumps, MRP-1 and MDR1/P-gp, is common in melanoma, especially in metastases, and so potentially could contribute to the chemo-resistant biology and thus incurable nature of this cancer type. The expression of these proteins - and, in particular, the predominant expression of MRP-1 - suggests that these pumps may be important contributors to this chemo-resistance. These findings suggest that the inhibition of multiple drug efflux pumps might be necessary if clinically relevant MDR reversal is to be achieved in malignant melanoma.
