[Abstract, Results, Discussion, Methods, Mixed]

Resistance to antiangiogenic therapy is directed by vascular
phenotype, vessel stabilization, and maturation in malignant
melanoma. Angiogenesis is not only dependent on endothelial cell invasion and proliferation, it also requires pericyte coverage of vascular sprouts for stabilization of vascular walls. Clinical efficacy of angiogenesis inhibitors targeting the vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) signaling pathway is still limited to date. We hypothesized that the level of vessel maturation is critically involved in the response to antiangiogenic therapies. To test this hypothesis, we evaluated the vascular network in spontaneously developing melanomas of MT/ret transgenic mice after using PTK787/ZK222584 for anti-VEGF therapy but also analyzed human melanoma metastases taken at clinical relapse in patients undergoing adjuvant treatment using bevacizumab. Both experimental settings showed that tumor vessels, which are resistant to anti-VEGF therapy, are characterized by enhanced vessel diameter and normalization of the vascular bed by coverage of mature pericytes and immunoreactivity for desmin, NG-2, platelet-derived growth factor receptor b, and the late-stage maturity marker a smooth muscle actin. Our findings emphasize that the level of mural cell differentiation and stabilization of the vascular wall significantly contribute to the response toward antiangiogenic therapy in melanoma. This study may be useful in paving the way toward a more rational development of second generation antiangiogenic combination therapies and in providing, for the first time, a murine model to study this.

RESULTSTumor growth and progression in MT/ret transgenic mice occurs via high, but
also low, angiogenic-active vascularizationFor analysis of tumor angiogenesis in a physiological setting, we used
MT/ret transgenic mice, which spontaneously develop
multiple melanoma (Kato et al., 1998)
and metastases in lymph nodes (100%), spleen (>80%), and lung and brain
(>10%; Fig. S1
A). Tumor development started after a short latency of 2-3
wk in the face and on the back of these mice, with up to ~100
tumors/mouse (~20% +- SD) by the age of 9-10 wk (unpublished
data). Immunohistological analyses revealed morphological analogy to human
melanoma (unpublished data) and the expression of tyrosinase, tyrosinase-related
protein (TRP) 1, and gp-100, which are enzymes, regulating the quality and
quantity of pigment production in melanocytes (Fig. S1 B). Interestingly,
detailed studies on tumor vascular beds showed two different vascular phenotypes
in this tumor model (Fig. 1, A and B).
One predominant type showed a high angiogenic-active phenotype (Fig. 1 A) with a mean microvessel density
(MVD) of 250/mm2 (Fig. 1 C),
in contrast to a second type which is characterized by only a few intratumoral
vessels (Fig. 1 B) and a mean MVD of
40/mm2 (Fig. 1 C) and
which was subsequently described as low angiogenic tumor. Analyzing tumor volume
in relation to MVD, it became evident that the phenotype of the vascular network
in MT/ret melanoma was dependent on neither tumor volume nor
tumor location (Fig. 1 C and not
depicted). Furthermore, the intratumoral vessels of the low angiogenic tumors
showed an almost 10-fold increase in vessel perimeter in comparison with the
vessels of the high angiogenic tumor type (Fig.
1 D) and a significant increase (P <= 0.001) in vessel lumina
(not depicted). In contrast to high angiogenic tumors, total coverage by
endothelial cells in the peritumoral tissue area of low angiogenic-active tumor
nodules was observed (Fig. 1 B,
arrowhead).Figure 1.Immunohistological and morphometric analyses of the vascular
network in melanoma of MT/ret transgenic
mice. (A and B) Representative images for immunoperoxidase
detection of blood vessels using the endothelial marker CD31 in melanoma
of high angiogenic (A) and low angiogenic (B) potential
(n = 478 tumors of 63 mice, independently
performed). Arrowheads indicate peritumoral coverage of endothelial
cells in low angiogenic tumors. (C) Scatter blot for MVD (in millimeters
squared) versus tumor volume (in millimeters cubed) in high and low
angiogenic tumors (n = 20 tumors/vascular bed of
four mice). (D) Quantification of vessel perimeter (in millimeters) for
both vascular beds of MT/ret transgenic melanoma
(n = 500 intratumoral vessels [100
vessels/tumor] of five high angiogenic and 100 intratumoral vessels of
nine low angiogenic tumors isolated from two mice). (E)
Immunohistochemically based distribution analyses for the incidence of
high and low angiogenic-active tumors per mouse (in percentage)
calculated after isolation of all tumors (n =
478 tumors of five mice). (F) Perfusion analysis (in percentage) of
intratumoral vessels was performed after injection of FITC-conjugated
lectin into tumor-bearing mice. Analyzing the number of double-positive
lectin- and CD31-positive tumor vessels in comparison with CD31
single-stained vessels resulted in calculation of vessel perfusion
(n = 100 vessels/vascular phenotype in 10
tumors each of four mice). Injection experiments were independently
performed in each mouse. (G) Analysis of vessel-vessel distances
(in micrometers) in both vascular beds of
MT/ret-transgenic melanoma (n =
500 intratumoral vessels [100 vessels/tumor] of five high angiogenic and
100 intratumoral vessels of nine low angiogenic tumors of two mice).
Median values of the experimental groups are indicated by the horizontal
lines (D and G). All morphometric analyzes were microscopically
quantified using CD31-stained tissue sections. Error bars, mean +-
SD. Bars, 50 um.In addition, lymphatic endothelial cells were detected in a high number of tumor
septa and peritumoral areas but not in intratumoral tissue in both tumor types
(Fig. S1 C). Assessment of the relative abundance of the vascular bed phenotype
per mouse showed a mean distribution of 83% high angiogenic to 17% low
angiogenic tumors (Fig. 1 E). However,
vessel perfusion did not differ in either tumor type (Fig. 1 F). Assessment of vessel-vessel distance in
individual nodules revealed a mean distance of 41.8 um (+-19.1
um) in tumors with high-angiogenic potential in comparison with 172.2
um (+-57.7 um) in low angiogenic-active tumors (Fig. 1 G), which warrant the delivery of
oxygen and nutrients for growth and progression.Rapid tumor growth of high angiogenic tumors results in increased tumor
hypoxiaThe observations described in the previous section strongly suggest that both
vascular beds coexist in parallel in the MT/ret transgenic
model without the need to switch from the low- to the high angiogenic vascular
phenotype to grow. To address potential differences in the tumor growth kinetic,
we measured tumor volume of individual nodules starting early in life with
tumor-free mice at weekly intervals over a period of 4 wk using flat-panel
volume computer tomography (fl-VCT). Over the first 3 wk, tumor growth kinetics
of high angiogenic-active tumors were significantly increased (P <= 0.001)
compared with tumors with low vessel density (Fig. 2 A). This was paralleled by increased expression of the
proliferation marker Ki-67 (Fig. 2 B) and
apoptosis indices (not depicted) in high angiogenic tumors, associated with
increased intratumoral hypoxic regions in those tumors (Fig. 2, C and D). The distribution of hypoxic areas within
both vascular beds was paralleled by detection of glutase-1 (unpublished
data).Figure 2.Comparative analysis of tumor growth rate, tumor cell
proliferation, and induction of hypoxia in MT/ret
transgenic mice. (A) Tumor growth curve of high and low
angiogenic-active melanoma. Tumor volume (in millimeters cubed) of
individual nodules was measured weekly over a period of 4 wk in mice of
concordant sex and age using fl-VCT (n = 10
tumors/mouse). The experiment was independently performed three times
using five mice (***, P <= 0.001). (B)
Immunofluorescence labeling of tumor cell proliferation using double
staining of the proliferation marker Ki-67 (red) and the endothelial
marker CD31 (green) in tumors of high and low angiogenic potential
(n = 15 tumors/vascular phenotype of five
mice, analyzed in five separate experiments). (C) Immunohistochemical
assessment of hypoxic areas in high and low angiogenic-active tumors
using pimonidazole injection (n = 10
tumors/vascular bed of three mice). Filled arrowheads indicate selection
of hypoxic tumor cells, empty arrowheads show tumor vessels, the
double-headed arrow indicates the hypoxic-free tumor margin, and the
star indicates tumor septa. Injection experiments were independently
performed three times with the corresponding outcome. (D) Quantification
of hypoxic area per tumor (in percentage) in high and low
angiogenic-active tumors (n = 10 tumors/vascular
bed of three mice) of three independent experiments;
***, P <= 0.001. Representative images are
presented (B and C). Error bars, mean +- SD. Bars, 100
um.Lack of pericyte coverage and defects in vessel maturation promote
neovascularization in angiogenic tumors of MT/ret transgenic miceIt has been shown that a plasticity window for remodeling neovasculature is
defined by pericyte coverage (Benjamin et al.,
1998). Therefore, we consequently analyzed the recruitment of mural
cells in both vascular phenotypes. NG-2, Desmin, and PDGFR-b have been
established as markers of early, i.e., immature, pericytes, whereas a
smooth muscle actin (SMA) has been reported as a marker of mature mural cells
including pericytes and smooth muscle cells (Nehls et al., 1992; Morikawa et
al., 2002; Gerhardt and Betsholtz,
2003). Intratumoral microvessels of MT/ret
transgenic melanoma were covered by Desmin-positive mural cells without
significant difference in both vascularization phenotypes (80% in high
angiogenic vs. 92% in low angiogenic tumors; Fig. 3, A and B). A comparable percentage of vessels also expressed
the early markers NG-2 and PDGFR-b (Fig.
3 B). In contrast, coverage of intratumoral microvessels by
a-SMA-positive mural cells was significantly higher (P <=
0.001) in tumors of low vessel density (98%) compared with high
angiogenic-active tumors (2%; Fig. 3, B and
C). In accordance with the maturation defect and partial lack of
pericyte coverage, excessive vessel leakiness was observed in tumors of high
vessel density using FITC-conjugated dextran (unpublished data). Alongside the
immunohistological findings, endothelial cells without or with partly developed
basal lamina were assessed in high angiogenic tumors by electron microscopy
(Fig. 3 D). Partly reduced pericyte
coverage was observed, and integration of pericytes into the basal lamina could
not be detected (Fig. 3 D). Based on
pericyte loss, direct connection of tumor cells to endothelial cells was
observed (Fig. 3 D). In contrast, nearly
all blood vessels of low-vascularized tumors exhibited a well constructed basal
lamina underlining the endothelial cell layer and intact integration of
pericytes into the vascular wall (Fig. 3
E).Figure 3.Quantitative assessment of mural cell maturation and stabilization
in MT/ret melanoma. (A and C)
Immunohistochemical double staining for the endothelial marker CD31
(green) and the early pericytic marker Desmin (red) in low-vascularized
(I) and high-vascularized (II) tumors (A), as well as for the late
differentiation marker a-SMA (C; red). Representative images of
>10 independently performed experiments are presented
(n = 43 high angiogenic and 27 low
angiogenic tumors of four mice). (B) Quantification of vessel coverage,
calculated as the percentage of NG-2-, Desmin-,
PDGFR-b-, or a-SMA-positive cells compared
with the number of CD31-positive vessels (n =
1,087 high angiogenic and 352 low angiogenic tumor vessels of 10 tumors
of four mice; ***, P <= 0.001). Data are
collected from >10 independent experiments. (D and E) Electron
microscopic evaluation of the vascular wall structure in sections of
tumor tissues with high vascular density (two to three blood vessels per
microscopic field; D) and low vascular density (one to two blood vessels
in three to four microscopic fields; E), analyzed for their construction
of a basal laminar, availability of pericytes, and pericyte integration
(n = 9 tumors/vascular bed of three mice).
Data are representative of three independent experiments. EC,
endothelial cell; Ery, erythrocytes within the vessel lumen; TC, tumor
cells; star, pericyte; arrowheads, basal lamina. Representative images
are presented (A and C-E). Error bars, mean +- SD. Bars: (A
and C) 100 um; (D and E) 2 um.Reduced levels of proangiogenic factors and their receptors in endothelial
cells of low-vascularized tumors are associated with resistance to anti-VEGF
therapyWe and others were able to show that the angiogenic cascade of the Ang-Tie
system is important for controlling vessel assembly, maturation, and quiescence
(Maisonpierre et al., 1997; Nasarre et al., 2009). Thus, enhanced
expression of Ang-2, which is responsible for vessel destabilization and
immaturity (Carlson et al., 2001), may
explain the defective integration and the partial loss of pericytes, vessel
instability, and leakiness in high angiogenic tumors, which in turn may result
in enhanced sensitivity of intratumoral microvessels to anti-VEGF therapy. We
therefore analyzed the expression of Ang-1, which induces Tie2 activation
leading to vessel stabilization and maturation (Wong et al., 1997), of its antagonist and vessel
destabilization factor Ang-2, of their receptor Tie2, and of VEGF-A and its main
receptor VEGFR2 in laser microdissected intratumoral endothelial cells by
quantitative real-time PCR. A significant reduction (P <= 0.001) in
expression of all monitored factors was observed in low angiogenic-active
endothelial cells, except for levels of Ang-1, which was present in equal
amounts in both vascular beds. In detail, intratumoral endothelial cells of low
angiogenic tumors showed an ~100-fold decrease in expression of Ang-2 and
its receptor Tie2, as well as an ~1,000-fold reduction of VEGF-A and its
major receptor VEGFR2 compared with endothelial cells isolated from
angiogenic-active vessels (Fig. 4). bEnd3
cells, a mouse endothelial cell line derived from cortex blood vessels, mouse
heart, and brain were used as controls for the angiogenic factor expression.Figure 4.Logarithmic presentation of quantitative expression analysis of
angiogenic factors and corresponding receptors from microdissected
endothelial cells of MT/ret melanoma. Laser
microdissected intratumoral endothelial cells from cryosections of high
and low angiogenic-active MT/ret melanoma were used for
the quantitative real-time PCR analysis of angiogenic factors and their
corresponding receptors (n = 5 high and 4 low
angiogenic tumors of three mice). Total RNA of bEND3 cells and mouse
brain and heart was used as a control for angiogenic factor expression.
The analyses for each factor were done in triplicate for each
experiment. Three independently performed experiments showed
corresponding outcomes. Error bars, mean +- SD.PTK/ZK does not affect mature tumor vasculature in MT/ret melanomaPericytes, in particular, have been recently appreciated as critical regulators
of vessel formation, stabilization, and function (Armulik et al., 2005; von Tell et al., 2006), but their role in the susceptibility of
tumor vasculature to antiangiogenic therapy has not been finally clarified.
Based on the observations described in the previous section, we used the
MT/ret model because it represents two different vascular
beds with differences in vessel maturation and stabilization to study
sensitivity to anti-VEGF therapy. As a reference for an antiangiogenic therapy,
we used PTK/ZK, a small molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitor, which was shown to
specifically block VEGF-induced autophosphorylation of VEGFR-1, -2, and -3 and
to inhibit endothelial cell proliferation, differentiation, and tumor
angiogenesis (Wood et al., 2000; Hess-Stumpp et al., 2005). Oral
administration of PTK/ZK in tumor-free MT/ret transgenic mice
resulted in an excessive reduction (P <= 0.001) of tumor numbers (Fig. 5, A and B) without affecting the
volume of growing tumors compared with the vehicle-treated control group (Fig. 5 C). Histological analyses disclosed
that nearly all tumors (mean, 98%) that developed during PTK/ZK treatment
exhibited the low angiogenic vascular phenotype (Fig. S2, A
and B). As expected, the vehicle-treated control group exhibited
the normal distribution of ~80% high versus 20% low angiogenic-active
tumor beds (Fig. S2 B).Figure 5.Analysis of prevention and therapeutic effects of PTK/ZK on
melanoma development and progression in MT/ret
transgenic mice. (A) Tumor-free mice of concordant age and
sex were used for the prevention trial (n = 10
mice/experimental group). MT/ret transgenic mice,
orally treated with PTK/ZK (50 mg/1 kg in 0.9% NaCl) or vehicle (0.9%
NaCl) alone, were visualized at the beginning and end of therapy using
fl-VCT. Therapy-resistant tumors of the PTK/ZK-treated group are
highlighted by empty arrowheads. (B) Quantification of tumor development
at the end of the prevention therapy in PTK/ZK-treated
(n = 9 mice) and vehicle-treated
(n = 10 mice) transgenic mice
(***, P <= 0.001). (C) Total tumor volume
analyses (in millimeters cubed) of vehicle-treated (n
= 100 tumors of 10 mice) and PTK/ZK-treated (n
= 73 tumors of nine mice) mice, grown during therapy using
fl-VCT. Data of the prevention trial (A-C) were analyzed in two
independently performed experiments. (D) Assessment of therapeutic
effects of PTK/ZK in tumor-bearing mice screened at the beginning and
end of therapy by fl-VCT (n = 10
mice/experimental group). Hardly observable tumors are highlighted by
empty arrowheads. (E) Investigation of tumor number in vehicle- and
PTK/ZK-treated mice at the beginning and at the end of therapy
(n = 8 mice/experimental group;
**, P <= 0.005). (F) Analyses of total tumor volume
(in millimeters cubed) during the therapeutic trial using fl-VCT
(n = 100 tumors [beginning and end] of four
vehicle-treated and five PTK/ZK-treated mice). All data of intervention
experiments (D-F) were independently performed twice with
corresponding outcomes (n = 5 mice/group). Error
bars, mean +- SD.PTK/ZK efficiency represses tumor angiogenesis and results in vessel
regressionWe consequently analyzed the therapeutic effect of anti-VEGF therapy using PTK/ZK
in tumor-bearing animals to address the question of whether PTK/ZK is only able
to inhibit endothelial cell recruitment during sprouting angiogenesis or whether
PTK/ZK is also able to affect intratumoral vascularization of existing tumors.
For this purpose, tumor-bearing MT/ret transgenic mice were
selected for a therapeutic intervention trial and individually screened for
tumor number and volume at the beginning of therapy, using fl-VCT (Fig. 5 D), and over time. In this study,
PTK/ZK treatment resulted in inhibition of the development of novel tumors
compared with vehicle controls (P = 0.005; Fig. 5 E) without affecting the volume of preexisting
tumor at the end of therapy in both groups (Fig.
5 F). In accordance with the prevention study, immunohistological
analyses revealed that the majority of preexisting tumors showed low vascular
density at the end of treatment. Interestingly, PTK/ZK treatment in preexisting
tumors of high angiogenic potential obviously resulted in vessel regression
(Fig. S2 D), which was confirmed by detection of laminin-positive empty vessel
sleeves in the interspace between CD31-positive endothelial cells (not
depicted). Immunohistochemical analyses at the end of the therapeutic PTK/ZK
treatment showed, again in accordance with preventative treatment, that low
vascular melanoma nodules did not respond to PTK treatment and therefore were
distributed as with vehicle-treated mice (Fig. S2 D). It has been shown that
bone marrow-derived cells could also contribute to the resistance to
antiangiogenic therapy (Bingle et al.,
2002; de Visser and Coussens,
2006). Therefore, we analyzed the recruitment of macrophages in high
and low angiogenic tumors treated with vehicle or PTK/ZK during the
interventional setting. Immunohistological analyses for F4/80-expressing
macrophages revealed that the majority was located inside the lumina of blood
vessels or infiltrated as tumor cell-associated macrophages into the
intratumoral areas in both tumor phenotypes without significant differences in
number or localization of vehicle- or PTK/ZK-treated tumors (Fig.
S3).Mature vascular network in human melanoma metastases grown during adjuvant
bevacizumab therapyBased on our results using the murine melanoma model, we analyzed the vascular
network, mural cell recruitment, and level of pericyte differentiation in human
melanoma metastases, which had developed during the UK adjuvant bevacizumab
trial in stage III cutaneous melanoma. In contrast to melanoma metastases
observed from patients without therapy, bevacizumab-resistant metastases
displayed a 17-fold increase in the diameter of tumor-associated blood vessels
(mean, 5.3 +- 2.9 vs. 83.3 +- 21.7 um in untreated patients;
P <= 0.001; Fig. 6 A), as well as
an eightfold increase (mean, 305.3 +- 39.8 vs. 68.9 +- 23.0
um) in vessel perimeter (P <= 0.001; Fig. 6 B). Interestingly, all blood vessels of
bevacizumab-resistant tumors, identified by expression of CD31 (Fig. 6 C), exhibited mature vessel
morphology by the expression of the early differentiation marker Desmin (not
depicted) and the late marker a-SMA (Fig.
6 E) in contrast to the majority of blood vessels of metastases from
patients without bevacizumab therapy, where detection of desmin and
a-SMA-covered blood vessels could not be observed (Fig. 6, D and F).Figure 6.Immunohistological and morphometric analyses of the vascular
network in bevacizumab-resistant human melanoma metastases.
(A and B) Quantification for vessel diameter (in micrometers; A) or
vessel perimeter (in millimeters; B) of all existent tumor-associated
blood vessels in melanoma metastases of patients receiving bevacizumab
therapy (n = 100 vessels in three metastases of
three patients), compared with metastases, isolated from patients
without therapy (n = 100 vessels in 10 tumors of
10 patients; ***, P <= 0.001). (C and D)
Immunohistochemical detection of blood vessels using the endothelial
cell marker CD31 (red) in cutaneous bevacizumab-resistant metastases (C)
versus melanoma metastases developed off therapy (D). Arrowheads
indicate tumor-associated blood vessels for better visualization. (E and
F) Analysis of mural cell recruitment using the late stage
differentiation marker a-SMA (brown) in therapy-resistant
melanoma (E) and cutaneous metastases developed in patients without
treatment (F). Arrowheads indicate the blood vessel location of the
corresponding tumor section used for CD31 detection (D). Nuclei were
counterstained using Hematoxylin. All immunohistochemical analyses
(C-F) were done using all available and existent melanoma
metastases (n = 3 metastases of three patients)
of patients receiving bevacizumab therapy or melanoma metastases
(n = 10 metastases of 10 patients) of
patients without therapy. Immunohistological detection was performed
twice with concordant results. Representative images of analyzed
melanoma metastases are presented in C and D. Error bars, mean +-
SD. Bars, 100 um.

DISCUSSIONIn our study, we analyzed human melanoma metastases taken at clinical relapse in
patients undergoing adjuvant treatment with bevacizumab (AvastinR), but
we also analyzed a corresponding murine model in which melanomas develop
spontaneously. In both systems, tumor development during anti-VEGF therapy
(bevacizumab in humans and PTK/ZK in mice) was characterized by a mature
intratumoral vascular network and stabilization of the vascular wall. The level of
mural cell differentiation for vessel maturation and the process of vessel
stabilization by pericyte coverage are believed to be major mediators for priming
blood vessels to its sensitivity to anti-VEGF therapy.We also present, for the first time, a murine model (MT/ret)
developing spontaneously metastasizing melanoma characterized by high, but also low,
angiogenic-active tumors in parallel. This vascular phenotype is independent of
tumor volume or location. Fast growing highly angiogenic-active tumors exhibit
hypoxia-driven Ang-2 expression, leading to immature intratumoral vascular network,
basal lamina defects, and loss of pericytes. In contrast, low angiogenic-active
tumor nodules displayed stabilized vessels, a slower growth kinetic, and increased
vessel lumina. Highly vascularized tumors were characterized by significant tumor
regression in the adjuvant and remodelling of the tumor vascular bed in the advanced
therapy setting. Interestingly, low angiogenic-active tumors did not respond to
anti-VEGF therapy using the small-molecule inhibitor PTK/ZK. Careful expression
profiling analysis of laser microdissected tumor-associated endothelial cells from
both vascular beds revealed a significant decrease in expression of proangiogenic
factors Ang-2 and VEGF-A and their receptors Tie2 and VEGFR-2 in VEGF-resistant
MT/ret tumors. In summary, the most prominent differences
between the two vascular beds observed in this melanoma model were the vessel
structure (vessel density, vessel diameter/perimeter distribution, level of mural
cell differentiation, and pericyte coverage or basement membrane investment) and the
expression profile of the vascular-specific receptor tyrosine kinase systems.The concept of antiangiogenic cancer therapy seems simple at the first look;
destroying tumor vasculature and depriving the tumor of nutrients and oxygen will
ultimately induce tumor regression. The long-term survival benefit in patients of
targeting the VEGF signaling pathway has not been so affirmative as initially hoped
and better clinical outcomes have been seen in combination with chemotherapy (Hurwitz et al., 2004) or additional drugs
(Perez et al., 2009). A key finding in
this context is that VEGF-A/VEGFR-2 blockage leads transiently to vessel remodeling
and normalization of the tumor vascular bed, as described by increased pericyte
coverage of tumor vessels. This results in vessel stabilization and reduced vascular
permeability, which facilitates access of coadministered chemotherapeutic drugs
(Jain 2005).The role of VEGF in pericyte biology is less clear, and experiments aimed at
specifically addressing the role of pericytes in responses to antiangiogenic cancer
therapies are rare or lacking. Consequently, such experiments will need to be
performed in genetically manipulated models, resembling the human situation in
aspects of tumor development and angiogenesis. Conventional mouse melanoma models
(e.g., B16), based on the transplantation of tumor cells, are not suitable for such
studies. Transplantation of tumor cells triggers infiltration of immune cells such
as macrophages, which are known to mediate important processes during tumor
angiogenesis (Hagemann et al., 2009; Shieh et al., 2009), and the natural
situation of tumor development and histology of the disease is not comparable with
the clinical situation. Now, based on our findings, the MT/ret
transgenic mouse model is the first model which fulfills all criteria of
endogenously driven spontaneous tumor development and angiogenesis and presents, for
the first time, VEGF-dependent and -independent tumor growth in parallel.
Interestingly, distribution of both vascular beds does not correlate with tumor
volume or location. In addition, there was not an experimental hint that low
angiogenic tumors engage an angiogenic switch during progression and metastasis
leading to neovascularization and vessel destabilization.The observed altered pattern of mural cell recruitment into the vascular wall and the
maturation of blood vessels in both vascular phenotypes, and their role for
susceptibility to antiangiogenic therapy, was our most surprising finding. However,
the mechanisms of Ang-induced mural cell recruitment have not been elucidated.
Mechanistically, the most well understood pathway of endothelial
cell-directed mural cell recruitment is through paracrine-acting PDGF-B
(Abramsson et al., 2003). However, the
molecular cross talk between the Ang-Tie and PDGF-PDGFR systems has
not yet been resolved. In previous studies, we were able to show that host-derived
Ang-2 is able to affect early stages of tumor development and vessel maturation
(Nasarre et al., 2009). Thus, our data
suggest that hypoxia-triggered up-regulation of Ang-2, detected by laser
microdissection of tumor-associated endothelial cells of high angiogenic melanoma,
resulted in vessel destabilization by loss of pericyte coverage, followed by
induction of neovascularization. This corresponds with recent in vitro observations
of hypoxia-regulated Ang-2 expression in endothelial cells (Pichiule et al., 2004). These data confirm our recent finding
that Ang-2 expression levels correlate with disease progression and metastasis in
sera of melanoma patients (Helfrich et al.,
2009) and suggests again that the Ang-Tie system might have a more
direct effect on mural cell recruitment and maturation than previously thought.
Interestingly, differences in the expression of Ang-1 could not be observed between
vascular phenotypes. Ang-1 and Ang-2 have been described to exert opposing functions
during vessel development. Although Ang-1-induced Tie2 activation transduces
survival signals and leads to vessel stabilization and maturation (Suri et al., 1996), Ang-2 acts as a vessel
destabilizing agent that induces permeability and leads to dissociation of
cell-cell contacts in cultured endothelial cells (Scharpfenecker et al., 2005). This leads to the speculation
that if Ang-2 as an antagonistic Tie2 ligand has a stronger binding capacity for the
induction of Tie2 activation compared with Ang-1, resulting in mural cell depletion
and vessel destabilization independent of the presence of Ang-1 expression.Among the most surprising findings of the present study was the altered pattern of
mural cell recruitment and maturation of blood vessels in human melanoma metastases
taken at clinical relapse in patients undergoing adjuvant anti-VEGF therapy using
bevacizumab. These observations were paralleled by our corresponding melanoma model
using PTK/ZK. In both experimental settings tumor vessels, which are resistant to
anti-VEGF therapy, were characterized by increased vessel diameter, normalization of
the vascular bed by coverage of mature pericytes, and immunoreactivity for Desmin,
NG-2, PDGFR-b, and the late stage maturity marker a-SMA. Based on the
finding that PTK/ZK-resistant blood vessels of MT/ret transgenic
tumors showed only minor expression of proangiogenic factors (e.g., Ang-2 and
VEGF-A), resulting in low angiogenic potential and resistance to the traditional
antiangiogenic approaches, it is highly desirable to identify alternative ways to
modulate tumor vasculature that do not interfere with the complex regulatory network
of proangiogenic factors.Our findings demonstrate the role of mural cell recruitment and maturation for the
susceptibility to anti-VEGF cancer therapy. The findings warrant further mechanistic
analysis to focus on the molecular cross talk between Ang/Tie and PDFG/PDGFR
signaling during mural cell recruitment and maturation. This may contribute to a
more rational therapeutic exploitation of antiangiogenic therapy approaches. In this
context, it would be of considerable interest to analyze biopsies from patients
whose tumors are progressive despite VEGF/VEGFRs blockage. Results of such studies
would lead to clinical studies trying to combine modalities targeting tumor
angiogenesis by inhibition of VEGF signaling and blockage of mural cell recruitment,
as well as maturity by inhibition of PDGF-B pathways. Future work using combination
therapies targeting the implicated pathways and analyses of maturation kinetics in
spontaneous mouse models will pave the way to the rational development of a second
generation of antiangiogenic combination therapies to overcome the problem of
therapy resistance.

MATERIALS AND METHODSMice.Mice (C57BL/6) expressing the human ret proto-oncogene under
the control of the mouse metallothionein I promoter-enhancer (Kato et al., 1998) were provided by
M. Kato (Chubu University, Aichi, Japan). MT/ret transgenic
mice develop spontaneously cutaneous malignant melanoma metastasizing to
lymph nodes, spleen, lung, and brain that resemble human melanoma in many
aspects of histopathology and clinical development (Kato et al., 1998). Mice were crossed with C57BL/6
wild-type mice for heterozygous transgene expression and kept under specific
pathogen-free conditions in the animal facility of the German Cancer
Research Center (Heidelberg, Germany) and the Central Animal Laboratory at
the University Hospital Essen (Essen, Germany). Experiments were performed
in accordance with government and institute guidelines and regulations. For
definition of tumor development, mice were monitored for indicated time
points using fl-VCT (Siemens). Animal procedures were approved by the
Regierungsprasidium, Karlsruhe, and the Landesamt fur Natur,
Umwelt und Verbraucherschutz Nordrhein-Westfalen, Germany.Human tumor samples.Melanoma metastases of 59-66-yr-old patients, developed between 2 and
8 wk after receiving 8-11 cycles of bevacizumab (AvastinR)
as adjuvant therapy after resection of AJCC stage IIB, IIC, and III
cutaneous melanoma, and metastases of patients off therapy (concordant age
and gender) were assessed for their vascular bed and vessel maturity by
immunohistochemistry. All available biopsies from patients relapsing on the
treatment arm of the randomized-controlled clinical phase III study AVAST-M
(adjuvant aVAStin trial in high-risk melanoma), evaluating the VEGF
inhibitor bevacizumab, were obtained from October 2008 onward. Informed
patient consent and the appropriate Institutional Review Board approval was
obtained for all patients and relapses were confirmed by histological
examination. Human protocols were approved by the Oxford Research Ethics
Committee C (reference 07/H0606/112, tissue banking) and the trial approval
for AVAST-M (07/Q1606/15).Immunohistochemistry.Consecutive cryosections (MT/ret melanoma) and
paraformaldehyde-fixed paraffin sections (human melanoma metastases) were
processed for immunostaining. For detection of the endothelial cell marker
CD31, cryosections were fixed with acetone/methanol (1:1) and endogenous
peroxidase was blocked with 3% H2O2, followed by
avidin/biotin blocking. Nonspecific binding was blocked with 5% rabbit
serum/1% bovine serum albumin in PBS + 0.02% Tween for 30 min. Rat
anti-mouse PECAM-1 (BD), sheep anti-human PECAM-1 (R&D
Systems), or ChromPure goat IgG (Dianova), used as negative control, were
incubated and visualized using DAB or AEC Substrate Chromogen system (Dako),
followed by counterstaining of nuclei using Meyer's Hemalaun solution
(Merck). For the visualization of endothelial-pericyte association in
MT/ret tumors, double stainings were performed using
rat anti-CD31 (PECAM-1; BD) combined with rabbit anti-Desmin antibody
(Abcam), rabbit anti-NG2 (Millipore), rat anti-CD140b (PDGFR-b;
eBioscience), or mouse anti-a-SMA direct-labeled Cy3 antibody
(Sigma-Aldrich). Mural cells in human metastases were detected using mouse
anti-a-SMA (Sigma-Aldrich) and mouse anti-Desmin antibody
(Dako). Cell proliferation was assessed by immunostaining with rat
anti-Ki-67 antibody (clone TEC-3; Dako), basal lamina was visualized
by rabbit anti-laminin (Sigma-Aldrich), and lymphatic endothelial cells were
assessed using rabbit anti-Lyve-1 (ReliaTech), all of which were
counterstained with PECAM-1 for vessel detection. Macrophage recruitment was
analyzed using rat anti-F4/80 antigen (AbD Serotec). The number of
macrophages was calculated as F4/80-expressing macrophages per tumor area
(in millimeters squared) using microscopes (Olympus) and corresponding Cell
P Software (Olympus). For the detection of expression of the melanogenic
enzymes tyrosinase, TRP-1, and gp-100, paraffin-embedded tumor sections of 8
um were deparaffinized, followed by antigen retrieval using 1 mM EDTA
at 90degC for 10 min, blocking of nonspecific bindings, and incubation
of primary antibodies over night at 4degC. Antibodies against
tyrosinase, TRP-1, and gp-100 were provided by V. Hearing (National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD). Lymph endothelial cells were detected
using rabbit anti-Lyve-1 antibody (ReliaTech). Apoptotic cells were
detected by the MEBSTAIN Apoptosis Kit II (MBL International) and quantified
as percentage of TUNEL-positive areas per field. Primary antibodies were
detected by rabbit anti-rat Alexa Fluor 594, rabbit anti-rat
Alexa Fluor 488, or donkey anti-rabbit Alexa Fluor 594 (all from
Invitrogen). Nuclei were counterstained using propidium iodide. Slide
fluorescence was examined by confocal laser-scanning microscopy (TCS SP2;
Leica).Hypoxic tumor areas were detected by the formation of pimonidazole adducts
after injection of pimonidazole hydrochloride compound into tumor-bearing
animals for 30 min. Tumor sections were immunostained using the
Hypoxyprobe-1 Plus kit according to the manufacturer's protocol
(Natural Pharmacia International, Inc.). The hypoxic area index was
quantified as the percentage of positive tumor area per total tumor area in
tumors of corresponding volume.Morphometric analysis of tumor vessels and pericyte coverage.Morphogenic analyses of MT/ret tumors were done using consecutive
cryosections stained for the endothelial cell marker CD31. The
quantification of MVD and corresponding tumor volume was calculated using
the mean of three tumor sections per tumor (top, middle, and base) of
concordant distance. MVD was calculated as number of vessels per tumor area.
Intratumoral vessel perimeter and vessel-vessel distance were
measured in tumors of high and low vessel density. The percentage of high
angiogenic or low vascularized tumors per mouse was analyzed by isolation of
all tumors per mouse followed by endothelial cell detection using
immunohistochemistry. Pericyte coverage was assessed using the pericyte
marker NG-2, Desmin, PDGFR-b, or a-SMA in combination with
CD31 for the detection of individual phases during pericyte differentiation.
All vessels per tumor were counted using multiple alignment function. For
the assessment of pericyte coverage in human melanoma metastases, paraffin
sections of all available bevacizumab-resistant cutaneous metastases and
metastases developing off therapy were costained for the endothelial cell
marker CD31 and pericyte markers as described for murine analyses. All
present vessels were analyzed for vessel perimeter and diameter as described
earlier in this section. All morphometric analyses were performed on Olympus
microscopes and corresponding Cell P Software.Assessment of vessel perfusion and stability.Tumor-bearing MT/ret transgenic mice were injected through the tail vein 20
min before killing by cervical dislocation using 150 ug
FITC-conjugated lectin/150 ul 0.9% NaCl from Bandeiraea
simplicifolia (Sigma-Aldrich). A perfusion index was quantified
as the percentage of lectin-positive per CD31-positive vessels in high and
low angiogenic-active tumors. For assessment of vascular stability, mice
were injected via tail vein using 1 mg/100 ul FITC-conjugated dextran
(3.000 mol wt). After 15 min of incubation, mice were killed and
histological analyses were performed.Laser microdissection of tumor-associated endothelial cells.10-um cryosections of murine melanoma were cut under RNase-free
conditions, fixed with 70% ethanol in DEPC, and stained for the
identification of tumor morphology using Meyer's Hemalaun solution
for 1 min and EosinY for 1 s (both Merck). Intratumoral endothelial cells
were isolated from five high and four low angiogenic tumors using the
P.A.L.M. MicroBeam Microscope (Carl Zeiss, Inc.). RNA of microdissected
endothelial cells was isolated using the RNeasy micro kit (QIAGEN) according
to the manufacturer's instructions. Expression analysis of dissected
tumor-associated endothelial cells was done by quantitative real-time PCR
using 1 ug of total cellular RNA for reverse transcription.Quantitative real-time PCR.Specific primers of angiogenic factors and their receptors were designed to
detect the amounts of various messenger RNA species in tumor-associated
endothelial cells of the high angiogenic-active as well as low vascularized
melanomas. For the generation of the standard, each primer pair was
subjected to an endpoint PCR in a final volume of 30 ul using 1
ul bEND3 complementary DNA (cDNA; for Ang-2, Tie2, VEGF, and VEGFR)
or BALB/c fibroblast cDNA (for Ang-1) with 0.2 U Taq polymerase (GeneCraft),
500 nM dNTP, 3 ul 10x buffer (provided by Bio-Rad
Laboratories), and 0.5 uM of the particular sense and antisense
primers under standard conditions (at 95degC for 3 min followed by 34
cycles at 95degC for 30 s, 60degC for 45 s, and 72degC for 30
s and an extention at 72degC for 8 min). Afterward, the PCR product was
purified with PCR purification kit and cloned in the pDrive cloning vector
with the PCR cloning kit (both QIAGEN). Colonies were determined for
presence of the insert and the DNA was subsequently sequenced. Finally, 1
ul each of cDNA or standard DNA within the range of 103 to
108 molecules was amplified with SYBR green master mix
(Bio-Rad Laboratories) and primers in a final volume of 25 ul
according to the manufacturer's protocol. The total RNA of bEnd3
cells, a mouse endothelial cell line derived from cortex blood vessels and
mouse heart and brain was isolated using the RNeasy kit (QIAGEN). Afterward,
1 ug of each sample was reverse transcribed with the QuantiTect
Reverse Transcription kit in a final volume of 20 ul (QIAGEN). The
following primers were used: mGAPDH forward,
5'-TGACCACAGTCCATGCCATA-3', and reverse,
5'-GACGGACACATTGGGGGTAG-3'; mVEGF-A forward,
5'-ACTGGACCCTGGCTTTACTG-3', and reverse,
5'-ACACAGGACGGCTTGAAGAT-3'; mVEGFR2 forward,
5'-TTCTGGACTCTCCCTGCCTA-3', and reverse,
5'-TCTGTCTGGCTGTCATCTGG-3'; mAng-1 forward,
5'-AGGCTTGGTTTCTCGTCAGA-3', and reverse,
5'-TCTGCACAGTCTCGAAATGG-3'; mAng-2 forward,
5'-CACAGCGAGCAGCTACAGTC-3', and reverse,
5'-ATAGCAACCGAGCTCTTGGA-3'; and mTie2
forward, 5'-TCTGGGTGGCCACTACCTAC-3', and reverse 5'-
TGAAAGGCTTTTCCACCATC-3'.Electron microscopy.Electron microscopy was used for the assessment of ultrastructural analyses
of intratumoral vessels. Tumor samples were isolated and divided in half.
One half was used for electron microscopy and fixed in 2.5% glutaraldehyde
in 0.1 M cacodylate buffer. The corresponding half was used for
identification of tumor vascularization by immunohistochemistry. Semithin
sections from glutaraldehyde-fixed epoxy resin-embedded specimens
were stained with paraphenylen diamine for light microscopy (Weis and Schroder, 1989).
Ultrathin sections of osmium-treated tissue were contrast enhanced with lead
citrate and uranyl acetate for electron microscopy (Weis et al., 1995). The ultrastructure of tumor
vessels of both vascular phenotypes was studied in ultrathin sections using
an electron microscope (902; Carl Zeiss, Inc.) equipped with a digital
camera. On each section, five to six tissue areas were analyzed and used for
semiquantitative assessment of vessel phenotype in each tumor group.fl-VCT.For the evaluation of tumor number and volume in the MT/ret
transgenic mouse line, mice scanning was performed under inhalation
narcosis, using an fl-VCT scanner (Siemens) at the indicated time points
(Kiessling et al., 2004; Gupta et al., 2006). Total scan time
was 40 s with a rotation time of 21 s. A tube voltage of 80 kV and a tube
current of 50 mA with continuous radiation were selected. The reconstruction
field of view was 4.5 cm transaxially with a reconstruction matrix of 512
x 512 pixels and an axial slice spacing of 0.2 mm resulting in a
voxel size of 0.08 x 0.08 x 0.2 mm3. A modestly
sharp reconstruction kernel (H80s) was used for image reconstruction. Image
postprocessing was performed using standard three-dimensional postprocessing
steps, for example, volume rendering. The reconstructed volume datasets were
fitted with a standard DICOM header and transferred to a standard
radiological postprocessing workstation. The amount of metastasis was
counted by reviewing the datasets on multiplanar reformations. Standard size
measurement software was used for the quantification of tumor number and
volume (InSpace; Siemens). For tumor volume calculation, two orthogonal
tumor diameters were taken using the virtual caliper tool.Antiangiogenic treatment using PTK/ZK.MT/ret transgenic mice (concordant age and sex per group)
were monitored by fl-VCT for the individual status of tumor development.
Mice were treated at 2 wk of age (prevention, tumor free) or at 4 wk
(therapeutic intervention, tumor bearing) by oral administration of PTK/ZK
(Novartis; 50 mg/kg dissolved in 0.9% NaCl) or vehicle (0.9% NaCl) alone, as
a control, twice a day over a period of 4 wk. Mice were measured at the
beginning, weekly during treatment, and at the end of therapy for assessment
of tumor number and volume. At the end of therapy, tumors were isolated and
analyzed by immunohistochemistry. Experimental series (intervention and
prevention) were repeated twice.Statistical analysis.Student's t test was used for the determination of
statistical significance between experimental groups. All results were
expressed as mean +- SD. P-values <0.05 were considered
statistically significant.Online supplemental material.Fig. S1 shows the characterization of the MT7ret mouse model. Fig. S2
analyzes the effects of PTK/ZK on vessel formation in melanoma of MT/ret
transgenic mice. Fig. S3 displays the effects of PTK/ZK on macrophage
recruitment in high and low angiogenic tumors of MT/ret melanoma. Online
supplemental material is available at http://www.jem.org/cgi/content/full/jem.20091846/DC1.

Supplementary Material
Supplemental Material
