[Abstract, Methods, Results, Discussion]

NFAT signalling is a novel target of oncogenic BRAF in metastatic melanoma. Background: Metastatic melanoma is the most deadly form of skin cancer and with an overall 5-year survival rate of <11%, there is an acute need for novel therapeutic strategies. Activating mutations in the BRAF oncogene are present in 50-70% of cases and contribute to tumourigenesis, thus, defining downstream targets of oncogenic BRAF may help define novel targets for therapeutic intervention. The Ca2+/calcineurin-regulated transcription factor, Nuclear factor of activated T-cells (NFAT), is important in the pathogenesis of several human cancers, target genes of which are also known to contribute to melanoma progression. One such NFAT target gene is COX-2, increased expression of which correlates with poor prognosis; however, upstream regulators of COX-2 in melanoma remain undefined. Therefore, the aim of this study was to evaluate NFAT expression and activity in metastatic melanoma and establish whether or not oncogenic BRAF signalling modulates NFAT activity and determine if NFAT is a key upstream regulator of COX-2 in melanoma.   Methods: Nuclear factor of activated T-cells transcriptional activity and protein expression were determined in three human metastatic melanoma cell lines with differing B-RAF mutational status. NFAT activation by oncogenic BRAFV600E was explored by BRAFV600E overexpression and application of the specific MEK inhibitor PD98059. Regulation of COX-2 expression by NFAT was investigated using NFAT-targeted siRNA, calcineurin inhibitors cyclosporin A and FK506, in addition to COX-2 luciferase reporter vectors that selectively lacked NFAT binding sites.   Results: NFAT transcriptional activity was increased in BRAF-mutated melanoma cells compared with wild-type cells. Furthermore, in wild-type cells, overexpression of BRAFV600E increased NFAT activity, which was blocked by the MEK inhibitor PD98059. Using calcineurin inhibitors and siRNA-mediated knockdown of NFAT2 and 4, we show NFAT is required for COX-2 promoter activation and protein induction in metastatic melanoma cells.   Conclusion: NFAT2 and 4 are expressed in human metastatic melanoma cell lines and are activated by oncogenic BRAFV600E via MEK/ERK signalling. NFAT is an important upstream regulator of COX-2 in metastatic melanoma. Furthermore, as the BRAF/MEK/ERK pathway is hyperactive in other malignancies and MEK/ERK are also activated by oncogenic RAS in 30% of all human cancers, the potential to exploit NFAT signalling for therapeutic benefit warrants further investigation.

Materials and methods
Cell culture and chemicals
The human metastatic melanoma cell lines A375, CHL-1 and WM266-4 (American Type Culture Collection, Teddington, UK) were cultured in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (DMEM) (Lonza, Basel, Switzerland) supplemented with 10% foetal bovine serum, penicillin and streptomycin in a humidified incubator at 37degC/5% CO2. Primary human melanocytes were identified in cultures of primary keratinocytes obtained from human foreskin samples and isolated by selective trypsinisation, as previously described (Lovat et al, 2008). Primary melanocytes were cultured in medium-254 supplemented with melanocyte growth supplements (Invitrogen, Paisley, UK) plus antibiotics. Chemicals purchased were as follows; 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA), ionomycin, FK506 (Sigma, Poole, UK), Cyclosporin A (Merk Chemicals Ltd, Nottingham, UK) and PD98059 (Promega, Southampton, UK).
Luciferase assays
Nuclear factor of activated T-cells transcriptional activity was measured using an NFAT-dependent luciferase reporter (p(NFAT)9-luc) (Wilkins et al, 2004) (a gift from JD Molkentin, Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH, USA). In all luciferase experiments cells were co-transfected with a renilla luciferase control vector (pRLTK, Promega) and reporter firefly values were normalised to renilla values. Assays were carried out using the dual luciferase assay system (Promega). Cells were seeded in 24-well culture plates and transfected with 0.5 mg of firefly reporter plus 0.0125 mg of renilla control using Lipofectamine 2000 reagent and Opti-MEM medium (Invitrogen) according to manufacturer's instructions. For BRAF overexpression experiments, cells were transfected with 0.5 mg firefly reporter, 0.25 mg BRAF expression vector (pEFmBRAFWT or pEFmBRAFV600E (Davies et al, 2002), kind gifts from R. Marais, Institute of Cancer Research, London, UK) and 0.0125 mg renilla. COX-2 luciferase reporters were transfected, as described above, and were gifts from M.A. Iniguez, Centro de Biologia Molecular, Madrid, Spain (Iniguez et al, 2000).
siRNA-mediated gene silencing
Small interfering RNA (siRNA) targeting NFAT2 (cat. no. SI03057684) and NFAT4 (cat. no. SI03114118) (Qiagen, Crawley, UK) was transfected at a final concentration of 40 nM using Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Cells were incubated for 48 h after transfection then treated with TPA (50 nM) and ionomycin (1 mM) for 4 h and cell lysates were prepared for western blotting.
mRNA extraction and real-time qPCR
Total mRNA was extracted using an RNeasy kit (Qiagen) and converted to cDNA using a high capacity cDNA reverse transcriptase kit (Applied Biosystems, Warrington, UK) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Expression of NFAT mRNA was determined using a customised gene expression card (Applied Biosystems) and real-time qPCR was carried out using the ABI Prism 7900HT sequence detection system.
Western blotting
Total protein was extracted from cell pellets, resolved by SDS-PAGE (Web Scientific, Crewe, Cheshire, UK), and transferred to PVDF membranes, blocked and probed as previously described (Flockhart et al, 2008). In all, 30 mg of protein was loaded per lane. Antibodies used were as follows: COX-2 (1 : 100), BRAF (1 : 1000), NFAT3 (1 : 1000) and NFAT4 (1 : 500) (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Autogen Bioclear, Calne, UK), ERK and phospho-ERK (1 : 1000, Cell Signalling Technology, New England Biolabs, Hitchin, UK), and NFAT2 (1 : 1000, BD Biosciences, Oxford, UK). Equal protein loading was confirmed by blotting for b-actin (1 : 40 000, Sigma) or GAPDH (1 : 2000, Cell Signalling Technology). Antibody signal was detected using HRP-conjugated secondary antibodies (1 : 2000, Millipore Ltd, Watford, UK) and membranes were visualised using ECL Plus reagent (Amersham Biosciences, Buckinghamshire, UK) and a Fujifilm FLA-3000 fluorescent image analyzer.
Statistical analysis
Statistical analysis was performed using GraphPad Prism version 5. 00, GraphPad Software (San Diego, CA, USA).

Results
NFAT activity and expression in metastatic melanoma cell lines
Basal NFAT transcriptional activity was measured in three human metastatic melanoma cell lines with different BRAF mutational status. CHL-1 cells are BRAF wild-type, whereas A375 and WM266-4 cells harbour BRAFV600E and BRAFV600D mutations respectively (Dhomen and Marais, 2007). NFAT transcriptional activity was approximately 10-fold higher in A375 cells and approximately 70-fold higher in WM266-4 cells compared with BRAF wild-type CHL-1 cells (Figure 1A), consistent with increased B-RAF activity of BRAFV600D compared with BRAFV600E (Wan et al, 2004). At the mRNA level, NFAT2 and to a greater extent NFAT4 were expressed in all the three cell lines and in primary melanocytes, whereas NFAT3 mRNA was expressed exclusively in primary melanocytes, and NFAT1 expression was not detected in any cell type (Figure 1B). We therefore examined the expression of NFAT2, 3 and 4 proteins in primary melanocytes and in the metastatic cell lines. Three previously described NFAT2 isoforms (Hogan et al, 2003) were expressed in primary melanocytes but were absent in CHL-1 cells, whereas their expression was higher in A375 cells and had further increased in WM266-4 cells (Figure 1C). NFAT3 protein was exclusively expressed in primary melanocytes (Figure 1C). NFAT4 protein was not detected in primary melanocytes and was expressed at low levels in CHL-1 cells, whereas expression had increased in A375 cells and elevated further in WM266-4 cells (Figure 1C). These data suggest that NFAT2 and NFAT4 are the active NFAT proteins that contribute to the NFAT activity shown in Figure 1A.
NFAT is activated by oncogenic BRAFV600E
As data in Figure 1 indicated NFAT transcriptional activity was higher in BRAF-mutated melanoma cells; activation of NFAT by mutant BRAF was further investigated. Inhibition of BRAF/MEK/ERK signalling using the highly specific MEK inhibitor PD98059 resulted in a reduction in NFAT transcriptional activity among all three melanoma cell lines (Figure 2A). PD98059 also reduced the amount of phosphorylated-ERK1/2, thereby confirming inhibition of MEK/ERK signalling and that MEK/ERK signals regulate NFAT activity (Figure 2A). We next assessed the effect of overexpression of BRAFWT or the most common BRAF mutation in melanoma, BRAFV600E, on NFAT transcriptional activity in CHL-1 cells. Overexpression of BRAFWT had no effect on NFAT activity, whereas BRAFV600E induced a significant three-fold increase that was blocked by PD98059 (Figure 2B). Western blotting confirmed overexpression of BRAFWT and BRAFV600E, BRAFV600E-induced ERK phosphorylation and inhibition of BRAFV600E-induced ERK phosphorylation by PD98059 (Figure 2B). These data indicate that BRAFV600E increases NFAT transcriptional activity via MEK/ERK-dependent signalling (Figure 2C).
NFAT regulates COX-2 protein induction in metastatic melanoma cell lines
The importance of NFAT signalling in regulating COX-2 promoter activation and protein production was evaluated in BRAF-mutated melanoma cells using COX-2 luciferase reporter vectors that selectively lacked functional NFAT binding sites, calcineurin inhibitors and siRNA-mediated knockdown of NFAT2 and 4. Treating A375 and WM266-4 cells with the classical NFAT activators TPA and ionomycin (TPA/iono) (Hogan et al, 2003) increased both NFAT transcriptional activity (Figure 3A) and COX-2 promoter activity (Figure 3B) that was blocked by the calcineurin inhibitors CsA and FK506. This induction/inhibition approach was then employed to establish effects of NFAT inhibition on COX-2 protein induction. Treating A375 and WM266-4 cells with TPA/iono induced a profound increase in COX-2 protein expression that was markedly reduced by CsA and FK506 (Figure 3C). In addition, as NFAT2 and 4 were shown to be expressed in A375 and WM266-4 cells (Figure 1), we decided to ablate NFAT2 and 4 protein using siRNA to show that specific NFAT proteins regulate COX-2 protein induction. Indeed, knockdown of NFAT2 or NFAT4 reduced COX-2 protein induction in these cells (Figure 4).
Additional COX-2 luciferase reporter experiments indicated functional NFAT binding sites in the COX-2 promoter were required for maximal COX-2 induction (Figure 5). The human COX-2 promoter contains two NFAT binding sites and COX-2 luciferase reporter vectors that selectively lacked either one or both of these sites were used to further assess the importance of NFAT as a regulator of the COX-2 promoter (schematic in Figure 5A). Basal COX-2 promoter activity and activity induced by TPA/iono was assessed. Treating A375 and WM266-4 cells with TPA/iono increased the COX-2 promoter activity and this response was reduced in vectors that contained mutated distal (dmut) or proximal (pmut) sites compared with the vector containing both functional NFAT binding sites (274) (Figure 5B, C). Basal promoter activity was slightly reduced in vectors with either dmut or pmut sites, whereas the vector with both NFAT sites mutated reported minimal activity. The reporter vector with both NFAT sites mutated (d/pmut) was not induced at all by TPA/iono in either cell type (Figure 5B, C). Collectively, these data provide evidence that NFAT regulates COX-2 promoter activity and induction of COX-2 protein in metastatic melanoma cells.

Discussion
Previous studies have shown that NFAT signalling is important in haematological malignancies and solid tumours (Buchholz and Ellenrieder, 2007; Medyouf and Ghysdael, 2008) and that NFAT is activated by environmental carcinogens such as ultraviolet radiation (Flockhart et al, 2008), but a role for oncogene mutation-driven NFAT signalling has not been previously described. Although a6b4 integrin signals stimulate NFAT activity in breast cancer (Jauliac et al, 2002), we now identify that NFAT is activated by oncogenic BRAF signalling, which is the most frequently mutated gene in melanoma and a gene frequently mutated in many other cancers. Activating BRAF mutations are present in 29-69% of papillary thyroid carcinomas (Wojciechowska and Lewinski, 2006), are also common in colorectal cancers (Ogino et al, 2009) and present in 4% of small cell lung cancers (Halilovic and Solit, 2008). Identifying that NFAT functions downstream of mutant BRAF in melanoma, raises the possibility that NFAT may be similarly activated in other BRAF-mutated cancers.
Mechanistically, our data indicate that activation of NFAT by oncogenic BRAFV600E involves canonical BRAF/MEK/ERK signalling. Studies in myocytes and T and B lymphocytes indicate that non-oncogenic Ras/RAF signalling increases NFAT activity via ERK activation concurrent with results from this study (Ichida and Finkel, 2001; Tsukamoto et al, 2004). Although MAPK signalling in a non-oncogenic context has been shown to be an important regulator of NFAT activity, the mechanism responsible for this is not completely understood. It is interesting to note that elevated MEK/ERK signalling stimulates AP-1 complex formation which is a well established binding-partner of NFAT that supports NFAT-mediated gene transcription (Macian et al, 2000, 2001). In addition, MEK, ERK, calcineurin and NFAT4 are able to form a large molecular weight protein complex in cardiac myocytes, and although active MEK/ERK signalling did not affect NFAT at the nuclear localisation level, MEK/ERK signalling did increase DNA binding of NFAT4 (Sanna et al, 2005). In this context, increased NFAT transcriptional activity required AP-1 complex formation (Sanna et al, 2005). It is therefore possible that oncogenic Ras/RAF signalling may increase DNA binding and transcriptional activity of NFAT proteins via a MEK/ERK-dependent mechanism that may also require AP-1 complex formation. Further studies to elucidate the mechanism by which MEK/ERK signals increase NFAT transcriptional activity are required particularly, since MEK/ERK/NFAT signalling may be important in other cancers.
Our observation that NFAT activity was higher in V600D-mutated WM266-4 cells compared with V600E-mutated A375 cells, which correlated with the amount of BRAF kinase activity evoked by each mutant is particularly noteworthy. The V600E mutation confers an increase in BRAF kinase activity of approximately 480 times compared with wild-type BRAF, whereas the V600D mutation increases this by approximately 700 times (Wan et al, 2004). The level of inhibition of NFAT activity by PD98059 also correlated with the ability of PD98059 to reduce levels of phospho-ERK consistent with the notion that NFAT activity is regulated in-part by MEK/ERK-dependent signalling in melanoma cells. Increased amounts of PD98059 were not used in an effort to further reduce phospho-ERK levels in WM266-4 cells, as increased concentrations of PD98059 can exert non-specific effects. Although MEK inhibition resulted in the downregulation of NFAT activity in BRAF mutant melanoma cells, this effect was also evident in BRAF wild-type CHL-1 cells, although the absolute levels of NFAT activation were substantially lower. This is not surprising as MEK/ERK signalling is still functional, albeit at lower levels in CHL-1 cells. Indeed, the low threshold level of pERK in these cells may promote their sensitisation to MEK inhibition.
The involvement of MEK/ERK activation raises the possibility that other upstream signals activating MEK/ERK may increase NFAT activity. This is highly significant as oncogenic RAS (active in approximately 30% of all human cancers) signals partly via MEK/ERK (Schubbert et al, 2007), thus further investigation of NFAT signalling in the context of oncogenic Ras/RAF is merited.
The identification of COX-2 as a direct transcriptional target of NFAT in melanoma suggests targeting NFAT/COX-2 signalling may offer a novel therapeutic strategy. COX-2 contributes to tumourigenesis through stimulation of cell proliferation, angiogenesis and tumour metastasis (Buchholz and Ellenrieder, 2007). Recent clinical trials of the specific COX-2 inhibitor celecoxib suggest that COX-2 inhibition may increase the clinical efficacy of temozolomide for melanoma treatment (Gogas et al, 2006). Furthermore, as COX-2 is more highly expressed in cutaneous melanoma and metastatic melanoma compared with benign naevi (Chwirot and Kuzbicki, 2007), defining upstream regulators could be valuable for drug development. Pertinent to cancer pathogenesis and metastasis, c-myc and VEGF are additional transcriptional targets of NFAT (Buchholz and Ellenrieder, 2007), further emphasising the relevance of NFAT signalling for melanoma therapy.
Although the classical calcineurin/NFAT inhibitors CsA and FK506 revolutionised transplant biology by inducing immunosuppression via NFAT inactivation in T cells, their potential application in cancer therapy remains untested. The value of CsA and FK506 per se may be limited as long term, systemic application in transplant patients causes renal toxicity and increases cancer risk because of reduced immunosurveillance (Botti et al, 1998; Sheil, 1998). Novel analogues of CsA and FK506 named ISATX247 and L732531 respectively, exhibit significantly less toxicity while retaining efficacy, and may have a place in future cancer therapy directed at NFAT inhibition (Dumont, 2000; Aspeslet et al, 2001; Stalder et al, 2003). Alternatively, novel small peptides that block calcineurin/NFAT interaction without inhibiting calcineurin phosphatase activity have exhibited efficacy for inhibiting NFAT in vivo in the absence of significant toxicity (Yu et al, 2007) and may prove to be valuable as therapeutic NFAT antagonists.
In summary, NFAT is expressed and is transcriptionally active in human metastatic melanoma cell lines and is activated by oncogenic BRAFV600E via canonical MEK/ERK signalling. Although NFAT is overexpressed in other cancers, activation has never previously been linked to the mutation of a specific oncogene. Data indicating that COX-2 expression in melanoma is regulated by NFAT further suggest that NFAT merits additional investigation as a transcription factor important in melanoma biology. Furthermore, given that Ras/RAF signalling is highly activated in many other human cancers, the potential to exploit NFAT signalling for therapeutic benefit clearly warrants further investigation.
