[Abstract, Introduction, Methods, Results, Discussion, Mixed]

Human Macrophages and Dendritic Cells Can Equally Present MART-1 Antigen to CD8+ T Cells after Phagocytosis of Gamma-Irradiated Melanoma Cells. Dendritic cells (DC) can achieve cross-presentation of naturally-occurring tumor-associated antigens after phagocytosis and processing of dying tumor cells. They have been used in different clinical settings to vaccinate cancer patients. We have previously used gamma-irradiated MART-1 expressing melanoma cells as a source of antigens to vaccinate melanoma patients by injecting irradiated cells with BCG and GM-CSF or to load immature DC and use them as a vaccine. Other clinical trials have used IFN-gamma activated macrophage killer cells (MAK) to treat cancer patients. However, the clinical use of MAK has been based on their direct tumoricidal activity rather than on their ability to act as antigen-presenting cells to stimulate an adaptive antitumor response. Thus, in the present work, we compared the fate of MART-1 after phagocytosis of gamma-irradiated cells by clinical grade DC or MAK as well as the ability of these cells to cross present MART-1 to CD8+ T cells. Using a high affinity antibody against MART-1, 2A9, which specifically stains melanoma tumors, melanoma cell lines and normal melanocytes, the expression level of MART-1 in melanoma cell lines could be related to their ability to stimulate IFN-gamma production by a MART-1 specific HLA-A*0201-restricted CD8+ T cell clone. Confocal microscopy with Alexa Fluor(r)647-labelled 2A9 also showed that MART-1 could be detected in tumor cells attached and/or fused to phagocytes and even inside these cells as early as 1 h and up to 24 h or 48 h after initiation of co-cultures between gamma-irradiated melanoma cells and MAK or DC, respectively. Interestingly, MART-1 was cross-presented to MART-1 specific T cells by both MAK and DC co-cultured with melanoma gamma-irradiated cells for different time-points. Thus, naturally occurring MART-1 melanoma antigen can be taken-up from dying melanoma cells into DC or MAK and both cell types can induce specific CD8+ T cell cross-presentation thereafter.

Introduction
Cutaneous melanoma (CM) accounts for 4% of all neoplasia and it
is the tumor with the fastest growing incidence worldwide [1]. Melanoma tumors are highly
resistant to chemotherapy, but more responsive to immunological treatments.
A large variety of antigens have been associated to CM, such as Melan A/MART-1 [2], [3], gp100 [4], Tyrosinase [5], TRP-2 [6], and NY-ESO-1 [7]. MART-1 is a hydrophobic
transmembrane protein without glycosylation sites highly enriched in early
melanosomes. MART-1 is necessary for gp100 function, another antigen associated
to CM, involved in the regulation of melanosome formation [8]. MART-1 is expressed in skin
and retinae melanocytes and in the majority of melanoma tumors, but it is
absent from other tissues and tumors. It was isolated thanks to the specific
recognition by T lymphocytes of MART-1 derived peptides, specially in the
context of the HLA-A0201 haplotype, present in tumor infiltrates from melanoma
patients [2], [3]. Thus, MART-1
is immunogenic in humans and has been widely exploited to induce anti-melanoma
immunity in patients by means of several vaccination strategies. Among them,
the use of MART-1 peptides either injected with adjuvants and/or pulsed on
DC has been tested in clinical settings, although with very modest outcomes
so far [9]-[11]. Also, MART-1
specific immune responses are frequently assessed to monitor the ability of
melanoma vaccines to induce immunity in treated patients [12].
Using whole irradiated tumor cells to load DC could be preferable to develop
DC-based vaccines since melanoma cells could contribute with known antigens
such as MART-1 and probably unknown antigens. We have used this strategy to
vaccinate melanoma patients with a mixture of gamma-irradiated melanoma cell
lines and BCG, a potent inflammatory adjuvant [13],
and plus GM-CSF to further attract DC to the vaccination site [14]. We and others have demonstrated
in murine models [15],
and in humans [16], [17] that when
DC engulf gamma-irradiated melanoma cells, antigens can be cross-presented
for the generation of HLA class I/peptide-complexes, allowing the induction
of specific CTLs. However, in the human, the fate and immunogenic potential
of DC that have phagocytosed dying tumor cells or their debris remains an
open issue.
The use of irradiated allogeneic tumor cells is based on the paradigm that
tumor cells would only trigger MHC-restricted tumor-specific immunity after
being phagocytosed by DC, the main initiators of immune response able to activate
naive CD8+ T cells [18].
After phagocytosis, DC evolve to a mature phenotype, diminish their phagocytic
ability, express HLA class II and co-stimulatory molecules on their surface,
and acquire the capacity to present antigens in the appropriate self-HLA context.
In parallel, and through the expression of adequate chemokine receptors, such
as CCR7, DC are able to migrate to the draining lymph nodes to prime naive
lymphocytes and trigger cellular and/or humoral immunity [19]. Both CD4+
and CD8+ naive cells can be primed by DC [18]. CD8+
T cells can be stimulated after phagocytosis by a process called cross-presentation
that allows exogenous peptides to be presented in the context of HLA Class
I molecules [20].
Some other studies have used non-naturally occurring tumor-associated antigens
such as tumor cells virally transduced with antigens or apoptotic tumor cells
infected with recombinant viruses encoding melanoma associated antigens [21]-[24]. However,
few of these studies have evaluated the cross-presentation of naturally occurring
melanoma antigens taken up from apoptotic/necrotic tumor cells.
Other phagocytes like macrophages could also be possible mediators in the
induction of antitumor immunity, although their clinical use has focused only
on their tumoricidal activity. Notably, the ability of human macrophages prepared
for clinical use to cross-present naturally-occurring tumor-associated antigens
has not been investigated, although it has been shown that thioglycolate-elicited
peritoneal or bone-marrow derived mouse macrophages can present efficiently
an exogenous antigen (OVA-beads or OVA-derived peptide) and stimulate naive
CD8+ T cells to differentiate into OVA-specific memory cells [25], [26] Brayer et
al also showed that thioglycolate-elicited peritoneal exudate mouse macrophages
exhibit an enhanced cross-presentation of influenza hemaglutinin (HA) and
OVA-derived peptides with targeted STAT3 disruption [27]. It has also been shown that
thioglycolate-elicited peritoneal mouse macrophages are more efficient in
inducing cross-presentation following phagocytosis than when loaded with OVA-derived
peptide [28].
More recently, it has been shown that lymph node resident CD169+
mouse macrophages are responsible for early activation of OVA-antigen specific
CD8+ T cells [29].
Thus, there is no demonstration that clinical grade human macrophages can
efficiently cross-present naturally-occurring tumor antigens and, if so, how
it compares with the well-documented cross-presentation achieved by human
DC prepared for therapeutic use. Of note, when mice were vaccinated with DC
loaded with apoptotic/necrotic B16 cells (DC-Apo/Nec), a tertiary lymphoid
structure was generated at the vaccination site that contained a wide variety
of cell populations, including macrophages, polymorphonuclear cells, as well
as CD4+ and CD8+ T lymphocytes found together
with DC [30].
This suggests that macrophages could also contribute to the antitumor response
against gamma-irradiated tumor cells locally, or after migration to the lymph
nodes.
Thus, we tested the cross-presentation of human clinical grade DC and macrophages
cultured with gamma-irradiated melanoma cells as a source of MART-1 antigen
to a specific CD8+ T cell clone. Using a new mouse high-affinity
monoclonal antibody (mAb) against MART-1, 2A9, we analyzed the presence of
MART-1 within two different human antigen-presenting cells, DC and IFN-gamma
activated macrophages (MAK), after phagocytosis of MART-1 expressing gamma-irradiated
melanoma cells at different time points. We also related this antigen capture
to MART-1 cross-presentation to specific CD8+ T lymphocytes.

Materials and Methods
Tumor cells
Six melanoma cell lines (MEL-XY1, MEL-XY3, MEL-XX4 [17], MEL-XX5, MEL-XY6, and MEL-XY10)
were established from tumor biopsies from metastatic melanoma patients at
the Instituto Alexander Fleming (Buenos Aires, Argentina). Jau cells are melanoma
cells derived from a metastatic tumor biopsy that can be cultured for several
days in vitro (primary culture). All cell lines and Jau cells,
except MEL-XX4 and MEL-XY10, are HLA*0201 positive as determined by FACS
analysis with a phycoerythrine (PE)-labeled anti-HLA-A2 monoclonal antibody
(mAb) (clone BB7.2, BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA, USA). All tumor biopsy
samples were obtained from melanoma patients who were enrolled in several
clinical trials authorized by the Comite de Docencia e Investigacion
of Instituto Alexander Fleming (Institutional Review Board) and who gave written
informed consent. Cells were cultured as previously described [17].
MART-1 non-expressing breast carcinoma MCF-7 cells [31] [obtained from the American
Tissue Culture Collection (ATCC, Manassas, USA)] were cultured in DMEM/F12,
supplemented with 100I.U./mL penicillin, 100 ug/mL streptomycin, 2 mM
glutamine, 10 ug/mL insulin, 10% FBS. HLA-A*0201 positive
MART-1 non-expressing breast carcinoma IIB-BR-G cells were cultured as previously
described [32].
MART-1 non-expressing HT-29 colon carcinoma cells were obtained from the ATCC
and cultured in DMEM supplemented with 2 mM L-glutamine, 3.5 mg/mL sodium
carbonate, 4.5 g/L glucose and 10% FBS.
Macrophages and dendritic cells
Human IFN-gamma activated macrophages (termed Macrophage Activated Killer,
MAK) were a kind gift of Dr J. Bartholeyns (Immuno-Designed Molecules S.A.,
Paris, France). They were obtained as previously described [33].
Human DC were derived from PBMC of buffy-coats obtained from healthy donors
at the Hemotherapy Department of the Instituto Alexander Fleming as previously
described [17].
This procedure received approval from the Comite de Docencia e Investigacion
of the Instituto Alexander Fleming and healthy donors gave written informed
consent. To induce DC maturation, 2 ug/mL LPS (Lipopolysaccharide from E.
coli J5, Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA) were added and the cells were
further cultured for 48 hours. DC maturation was assessed by CD80, CD83 and
CD86 labelling.
MAK and DC phenotypes have been extensively characterized elsewhere [17], [33]. They were both obtained under
GMP conditions identical to those used for clinical trials [34], [35].
Anti-MART-1 monoclonal antibodies
MAbs directed against MART-1 were obtained by immunizing BALB/c ByJ mice
(Charles River Laboratories, L'abresle, France) with purified glutathione-S-transferase
(GST)-MART-1 fusion obtained by cloning MART-1 cDNA isolated from the IIB-MEL-J
melanoma cell line [36]
into the pGEX-2T vector (GE Healthcare, Saclay, France). After ELISA screening
for anti-MART-1 IgG mAbs, two hybridomas, 1F9 and 2A9, were selected and cloned
as previously described [37].
1F9 and 2A9 mAbs are IgG1, k as determined by isotype-specific ELISA.
Purification of these antibodies was performed by Protein-A affinity chromatography
(rProtein A Sepharose(tm) fast flow) (GE Healthcare). For confocal microscopy
experiments, the purified 2A9 mAb was coupled to Alexa Fluor 647
fluorochrome using the Alexa Fluor 647 Protein Labeling Kit (Molecular
Probes, Eugene, OR, USA). Animal used for hybridoma production were handled
in compliance with Institutional guidelines and experiments were approved
by the Ethics Committee in Animal Experiment Charles Darwin, Paris, France.
The affinity constants (Kaff) of 1F9 and 2A9 mAbs for GST-MART-1
coated onto ELISA plates were determined using the protocol described by Beatty et
al.
[38].
Briefly, 96-well ELISA plates (Nunc, Roskilde, Denmark) were coated overnight
at 4degC with four concentrations (4, 2, 1 and 0.5 ug/mL) of GST-MART-1
in PBS. Serial three-fold dilutions (from 1.33x10-7
down to 2.26x10-12 M) of purified 1F9, 2A9 mAbs or
of the anti-MART-1 A103 mAb (Calbiochem-Merck Chemicals, Beeston, United Kingdom) [39] were then performed
in duplicate for each concentration of GST-MART-1. After incubation for 2
hours at room temperature, binding was revealed using Alkaline Phosphatase
(AP)-conjugated goat anti-mouse IgG (Fc specific) antibodies (1:1,000)
(Southern Biotechnologies, Birmingham, AL, USA) for 2 hours at room temperature.
O.D.405 nm was measured after 30 minutes incubation at room temperature.
Competition binding assay
A competition assay was performed by ELISA using biotinylated 2A9 mAb and
unlabelled 1F9, 2A9 or A103 anti-MART-1 mAbs as competitors. 96-well ELISA
plates (Nunc) were coated with 5 ug/mL purified GST-MART-1 in PBS. Three-fold
dilutions of purified 1F9, 2A9 or A103 mAbs in PBS-Tween 0.05% (starting
at 20 ug/mL) were then incubated for 2 hours at room temperature. After
washing, biotinylated 2A9 mAb was added (700 ng/mL in PBS-Tween 0.05%)
and incubated for 2 hours at room temperature. After washing, microplates
were incubated with a streptavidin-horse radish peroxidase (HRP) solution
(Dako, Glostrup, Denmark) for 20 minutes at room temperature. O.D.450
nm was measured after 30 minutes incubation at room temperature.
Immunohistochemistry
Melanoma, colon and breast carcinoma biopsies were obtained from the Instituto
Alexander Fleming and from the Pathology Department, Hospital Interzonal General
de Agudos (HIGA-Eva Peron), Buenos-Aires, Argentina. Immunohistochemistry
(IHC) anonymised sections from melanoma biopsies were also kindly provided
by Pr. Vacher-Lavenu (Department of Pathology of the Tarnier Unit of Dermatopathology,
Cochin Hospital, Paris, France). Obtention of tumor biopsy samples was authorized
by the Comite de Docencia e Investigacion of Instituto Medico
Especializado Alexander Fleming, in which case patients gave written informed
consent. In case of biopsies from HIGA-Eva Peron and from Cochin Hospital,
since these samples belong to the Hospital archives and are anonymous, patient's
consent was not requested by the Bioethics Committee of the HIGA-Eva Peron
and the Ethics Committee from Cochin Hospital. Biopsy specimens were fixed
in 10% neutral buffered formalin, embedded in paraffin and 4-um
tissue sections were cut and processed for IHC. Epitope retrieval was performed
by incubation in a pressure cooker or in a water bath with citrate buffer,
pH 6.0, for 1 minute after reaching boiling temperature or at 95degC for
40 minutes, respectively. After inactivation of endogenous peroxidase, tissue
sections were blocked with normal horse serum (Vectastain Elite ABC Kit; Vector
Laboratories, Burlingame, CA, USA) or with 5% human AB serum (Biowest,
Nuaille, France) for 30 min, and incubated overnight at 4degC with
0.5 ug/mL 2A9 mAb. After washing, slides were incubated with biotinylated
universal secondary antibodies (Vectastain Elite ABC Kit) or with biotinylated
sheep IgG anti-mouse IgG1 antibodies (The Binding Site, Birmingham, United
Kingdom), followed either by avidin-biotin complex reagent and peroxidase
substrate (VECTOR NovaRed Substrate Kit; Vector Laboratories) or by streptavidin-HRP
(Dako) followed by AEC substrate (AEC Substrate kit for Peroxidase, Vector
Laboratories). Counterstaining was performed with 10% hematoxylin.
As a negative control, primary antibodies were omitted or a mouse isotype
control [IgG1, k (Southern Biotechnologies)] was used.
Western Blot of melanoma cell extracts
Melanoma cells were lysed with 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 5 mM EDTA, 150
mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, 0.1% SDS, in presence of Protease Inhibitor
Cocktail (Sigma) for 30 minutes on ice. Protein extracts were obtained after
centrifugation at 8,000xg for 10 minutes at 4degC
and total protein concentration was measured by the Bradford assay. Fifty
micrograms protein were fractionated in 12% SDS-PAGE gels, transferred
onto nitrocellulose membranes (Sigma), blocked with 3% dried skim milk
in PBS and then incubated with 2A9 mAb (5 ug/mL) and an anti-b-actin
mAb (clone AC-15) (Sigma) overnight at 4degC. Binding of the mAbs was revealed
using Alkaline Phosphatase (AP)-conjugated goat F(ab)'2 anti-mouse
IgG(H+L) (Jackson Immunoresearch, West Grove, PA, USA). Color development
substrate was 5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl-phosphate/nitro blue tetrazolium
(NBT/BCIP) (Promega).
MART-1 detection by FACS and confocal microscopy
MART-1 was detected by staining melanoma cells with 2A9 mAb, after fixation
with 3% paraformaldehyde (PFA) (Fluka, Buchs, Switzerland) and permeabilized
with 0.05% saponin (PBS-Sap). 2A9 mAb or an isotype-matched control
antibody (Sigma) (5 ug/mL) were incubated with cells for 1 hour at 4degC
in PBS-Sap. Cells were washed and further incubated with 1/50 secondary R-PE-conjugated
F(ab')2 goat-anti-mouse Ig(H+L) antibodies (Dako) for
1 hour at 4degC. They were analyzed by flow cytometry with a FACSCalibur
(BD Biosciences) with the CellQuestPro software (BD Biosciences). Results
are indicated as percentage of positive cells and Mean Fluorescent Intensity
(MFI).
For confocal microscopy, cells were grown on 0.1 mg/mL poly-L-lysine (Sigma)
treated coverslips (Knittel Glaser KN0011879, Braunschweig, Germany)
for 2-3 days at 37degC in a 5% CO2 incubator. After
washing, cells were fixed, permeabilized as above and incubated with Alexafluor647
coupled 2A9 mAb (2 ug/mL in PBS-Sap) for 1 hour on ice. After washing,
coverslips were mounted onto glass slides with Mowiol solution (Calbiochem-Merck
Chemicals) or with Prolong Gold with Hoechst (Invitrogen Life Technologies).
As controls for the phagocytosis assay, co-cultures were incubated at 4degC
instead of 37degC. Slides were analyzed with a confocal microscope LSM 510
(Carl Zeiss, Jena, Germany). Pictures were processed with the AIM or the Zen
2008 Light Edition software (Carl Zeiss).
Induction of IFN-gamma production by co-culture of melanoma cells and
M27 T cell clone
3x105 MEL-XY3 melanoma cells and M27 cells were co-cultured
(1:1) in 600 uL of AIM-V medium (Invitrogen), in 24-well plates,
overnight at 37degC. The M27 HLA-A*0201-restricted anti-MART-1 (AAGIGILTV)
CTL clone was kindly provided by Dr. C. Yee (Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research
Centre, Seattle, WA, USA). M27 cells were cultured and expanded as previously
described [40].
Cells were then harvested, centrifuged, and supernatants collected. Culture
supernatants were tested for IFN-gamma content with BD OptEIA human IFN-gamma
ELISA set (BD Biosciences), following the manufacturer's recommendations.
A calibration curve was performed for each experiment and the sample concentration
was calculated by log-log regression analysis using Cembal 2.2 software [17].
Phagocytosis assay
Gamma-irradiated melanoma MEL-XY3 cells (gamma-MEL-XY3) were generated
by 70 Gy gamma irradiation (Siemens Accelerator, Instituto Alexander Fleming)
and frozen under liquid N2 until use. Apoptosis was assessed by
Annexin-V/PI staining and FACS analysis (BD Biosciences). For MAK phagocytosis
experiments, 50 uL of gamma-MEL-XY3 cells (2x106/mL)
were deposited onto poly-L-lysine-treated lamellae into a well of a 24 well-tissue
culture plate. The same volume of MAK cells [6x106/mL]
was immediately added and mixed with gamma-MEL-XY3 cells (MAK:gamma-MEL-XY3
cell ratio: 3:1). After 20 minutes incubation at room temperature, 150 uL
of 5% FBS-Iscove's Modified Dulbecco's Medium (IMDM Medium,
Invitrogen Life Technologies)] were added and cells were incubated at
37degC for different periods of time (1, 3, 6, 24, and 48 hours). Either
MAK cells or MEL-XY3 cells were also deposited on coverslips to be used as
controls in labeling experiments.
Immature DC (iDC) from 5 day-cultures or LPS-maturated DC (mDC) were harvested
and placed [3x105/mL] into a 24-well tissue culture
plate with AIM-V medium. Gamma-MEL-XY3 cells were added at a DC/MEL-XY3 ratio
of 3:1 for different times (1, 3, 6, 24, and 48 hours). In each case,
after incubation, cells were washed with cold PBS, blocked with PBS-0.1%
BSA and stained either with the anti-CD86-Fluorescein Isothiocyanate (FITC)
(clone B70/B7-2, BD Biosciences) (DC) or with a mixture of anti-CD14-FITC
(clone MPhP9)/anti-CD32-FITC (clone FLI8.26) (BD Biosciences) (MAK).
Cells were then washed, fixed and permeabilized before staining with Alexafluor647-2A9
mAb as described above and analyzed by confocal microscopy. Controls included
DC and MAK incubated with Alexafluor647-2A9 mAb, or gamma-MEL-XY3
cells incubated with anti-CD86-FITC or a mixture of anti-CD14/anti-CD32-FITC
mAbs.
Cross-presentation assay
Cross-presentation of MART-1 after DC/MAK phagocytosis was tested using
the M27 HLA- anti-MART-1 T cells. DC were obtained from highly purified (>98%)
CD14+ monocytes derived from a HLA A*0201 donor using
anti-CD14 microbeads (Miltenyi Biotec, Germany). Monocytes were differentiated
to iDC by 5 days culture as previously described [17].
HLA A*0201 DC or MAK (3x105) were incubated with 105
gamma-MEL-XY3, or gamma-MEL-XY10, or gamma-IIB-BR-G as a negative control,
for 3, 6, 24 and 48 hours. Co-cultures were then incubated overnight with
M27 T cell clone (105 cells) in AIM-V medium. IFN-gamma amounts
in co-culture supernatants were determined in triplicate as described above.
Positive controls included LPS-treated mDC loaded for 3 hours at 37degC
with 20 ug/mL MART-1 or gp100 peptides plus 3 ug/mL b2-microglobulin
or MEL-XY3 live cells. Other controls included M27 cells incubated alone or
with gamma-MEL-XY3 or gamma-IIB-BR-G at 3, 6, 24 and 48 hours post-irradiation,
and with DC or MAK.
Statistics
Comparisons between IFN-gamma basal levels (M27 clone+gamma-irradiated
tumor cells) and co-culture-stimulated M27 cells (either with DC:gamma-MEL-XY3
or MAK:gamma-MEL-XY3) were analyzed using Student's t-test to determine
the p-values. p<0.05 was considered significant.

Results
Characterization of anti-MART-1 2A9 mAb
1F9 and 2A9 mAbs that bound to GST-MART-1 fusion protein in ELISA were
selected. Competition experiments performed with GST-MART-1 coated onto ELISA
plates and biotinylated 2A9 showed that both antibodies efficiently compete
for MART-1 binding, as well as the A103 mAb (Figure
1), an antibody previously shown to be a binder of a MART-1
epitope (100-110) located within the C-terminus part of the molecule [41]. Thus,
these mAbs recognize the same epitope or overlapping epitopes located in the
C-terminus part of MART-1. They also exhibited higher affinity for the GST-MART-1
fusion protein than the A103 mAb, in the nanomolar range, as shown using the
ELISA method developed by Beatty et al [38]
(Table 1).
10.1371/journal.pone.0040311.g001
Figure 1
Competition ELISA between anti-MART-1 1F9, 2A9 and A103 mAbs and biotinylated-2A9
mAb.
96-well ELISA plates were coated with purified GST-MART-1 and incubated
with purified 1F9, 2A9 or A103 mAbs (three-fold dilutions in duplicate). Biotinylated-2A9
mAb was then added. A streptavidin-HRP solution was used as detection reagent.
Results shown correspond to one representative experiment out of three independent
assays.
Since the 2A9 mAb exhibited the highest affinity and could be biotinylated
without losing its ability to bind MART-1, as opposed to 1F9 mAb, all the
other experiments were performed with this antibody. The 2A9 mAb stained MART-1+
melanoma cells using indirect IHC. A strong cytoplasmic staining of melanoma
cells could be observed, with discrete punctuate structures in the cytosol
being detected. It stained tumor cells both from primary tumor (Figure 2A) and metastases (Figure 2B), as
well as melanocytes present in epidermis (Figure
2C). No staining of keratinocytes (Figure
2C) and breast cancer cells (Figure
2D) was detected. Similarly, the 2A9 mAb did not stain colon
carcinoma cells (not shown).
10.1371/journal.pone.0040311.g002
Figure 2
Immunohistochemical staining of melanoma tumor tissues with the 2A9
mAb.
2A9 mAb staining of a primary tumor and of one metastasis from the same
melanoma patient is shown in (A) and (B), respectively; staining of melanocytes
present in epidermis is shown in (C), while no staining of keratinocytes is
observed. Black arrows indicate melanocytes. No staining is observed with
a breast carcinoma tumor biopsy (D). Original magnification: A and C = 1000x;
B and D = 400x.
Melanoma cells with different MART-1 expression elicit different IFN-gamma
production by MART-1 specific M27 T cells
FACS analysis after intracellular immunofluorescence staining by the 2A9
mAb showed that cells from five different melanoma cell lines and cells from
a primary culture of melanoma (JAU) differently express MART-1 (Figure 3A). MEL-XY3 cells strongly
express MART-1. MEL-XY6 and MEL-XY1 cells also markedly express MART-1, but
are heterogeneous as the percentage of stained cells is lower than that of
MEL-XY3. Of note, only 35-40% JAU and MEL-XX5 cells were stained.
Finally, MEL-XX4 cells showed the lowest level of MART-1 expression, both
in terms of percentage of labeled cells and MFI. The breast carcinoma MCF-7
cells did not exhibit any staining (Figure
3A). As shown in Figure
3B, MART-1 could also be detected by Western blotting, showing
that the 2A9 mAb binds a linear epitope. MART-1 was detected in MEL-XY1, MEL-XY3,
MEL-XY6 and Jau melanoma cell extracts but not in MEL-XX4 and MEL-XX5 cell
extracts. These latter cells exhibited the lowest percentage of labeled cells
in the immunofluorescence assay (Figure
3A). Finally, MEL-XY1 and MEL-XY3 cells showed the highest level
of MART-1 expression. MART-1 expression in MEL-XY6 was lower, although these
cells were readily stained (Figure
3A).
10.1371/journal.pone.0040311.g003
Figure 3
Differential MART-1 expression in melanoma cells and production of
IFN-gamma by M27 CD8+ T cells.
(A) Intracellular immunofluorescence was performed with cells from five
melanoma cell lines, in melanoma cells from a primary culture (JAU), and MCF7
breast carcinoma cells. Empty histograms show isotype controls and filled
histograms staining with the 2A9 mAb. Percentage of positive cells and MFI
are indicated. (B) The expression of MART-1 in cells from different melanoma
cell lines was tested by Western blotting with the 2A9 mAb, using an anti-b-actin
mAb as a loading control. (C) IFN-gamma production by MART-1-specific M27
T cell clone. Melanoma cells and M27 cells were co-cultured overnight at a
1:1 ratio. Culture supernatants were then tested by ELISA for IFN-gamma
content in triplicates. The mean IFN-gamma values (pg/mL +-S.D.) are
indicated. Results are representative of three independent experiments.
The melanoma cell lines were then tested for their ability to induce IFN-gamma
production by the MART-1 specific HLA-A*0201-restricted M27 T cells. As
shown in Figure 3C,
cells that express MART-1 (MEL-XY1, MEL-XY3, and MEL-XY6) elicited a HLA-A*0201-restricted
IFN-gamma production. Of note, all these cells express HLA-A*0201 to a
similar level (data not shown). Interestingly, cells that showed the highest
percentage of labeled cells in the 2A9 intracellular immunofluorescence assay
(MEL-XY3 and MEL-XY6) elicited the highest IFN-gamma production. As expected,
MEL-XX4 cells did not induce any IFN-gamma production since these cells are
negative for HLA-A*0201 expression (not shown).
No M27 IFN-gamma secretion was observed with the JAU primary culture cell.
This could be due to the fact that only 36% of these cells express
MART-1 and that, in addition, only a low HLA-A*0201 expression is observed
in no more than 60% of the cells (not shown).
MART-1 can be detected in human dendritic cells and macrophages after
phagocytosis of gamma-irradiated melanoma cells
We selected MEL-XY3 cells for further experiments since they exhibited
higher MART-1 expression almost uniformly (>90%). First, permeabilized
live and gamma-MEL-XY3 were labeled with the 2A9-Alexafluor647
mAb. A characteristic punctuate intracellular pattern of MART-1 expression
was detected with the antibody in both live and gamma-MEL-XY3 (Figure 4, left and middle
panels). HT-29 colon carcinoma cells were negative (Figure 4, right panel).
10.1371/journal.pone.0040311.g004
Figure 4
Intracellular MART-1 detection with 2A9-Alexafluor647 mAb
by confocal microscopy.
(A) MEL-XY3 viable cells and (B) gamma-irradiated MEL-XY3 cells (gamma-MEL-XY3)
showed a punctuate pattern of MART-1 expression, presumably staining melanosomes,
while HT-29 colon carcinoma (C) showed no staining. For better visualization,
nuclei were stained with Hoechst.
We then examined whether MART-1 could be detected into phagocytes after
phagocytosis of gamma-MEL-XY3 cells by MAK or iDC. Gamma-MEL-XY3 cells are
a mixture of apoptotic and necrotic cells as determined by Annexin V and propidium
iodide staining (Figure
S1). As shown in Figure
5A, the 2A9-Alexafluor647-labeled cell fragments
from gamma-irradiated MEL-XY3 cells could be detected attached to the cell
surface and inside iDC from 3 hours up to at least 48 hours after initiation
of co-cultures. We estimated the proportion of DC that have captured some
MART-1 labeled material from total DC (% phagocytosis) to be 10-20%
of cells by counting several pictures (at least 150 cells/time point) (not
shown). Lack of phagocytosis was observed when LPS-mDC were tested in the
phagocytosis assay (<3% phagocytosis) (not shown). When MAK were
tested in the phagocytosis assay (Figure
5B), labeled gamma-irradiated MEL-XY3 cells were seen in close
attachment to the MAK surface at earlier time points (1-3 hours) and
2A9-Alexafluor647-labeled material could be observed inside MAK
cells from 3 hours and up to 24 hours after the initiation of co-cultures.
Around 10-15% of MAK exhibited intracellular MART-1 pink labeling
after a 6 hours period of co-culture. This percentage tends to decrease thereafter,
down to around 5% at 24 hours. MAK co-cultures were analyzed for only
24 hours since after that time they started dying (not shown). No phagocytosis
was observed when DC or MAK co-cultures were incubated at 4degC (not shown).
10.1371/journal.pone.0040311.g005
Figure 5
Detection of MART-1 in DC and MAK after phagocytosis of gamma-irradiated
MEL-XY3 cells.
Co-cultures between gamma-MEL-XY3 cells and DC (A) or MAK (B) and cell
labeling and confocal microscopy were performed as described under Materials and Methods. White arrows show MART-1 labeled material
within DC and MAK.
DC and MAK are able to cross-present to specific CD8+
T cells MART-1 captured from gamma-irradiated melanoma cells
Since MART-1-labeled material could be detected inside phagocytes from
3 hours up to 48 hours after phagocytosis of gamma-MEL-XY3 cells, we then
investigated whether MART-1 could be cross-presented to specific CD8+
T cells at different times after phagocytosis.
As observed in Figure
6, both DC and MAK were able to induce IFN-gamma production
from M27 cells as early as 3 hours and up to 48 hours after initiation of
co-cultures with gamma-MEL-XY3 cells. In both cases, the amount of IFN-gamma
increased along the co-culture time, suggesting that M27 T cells are being
stimulated more efficiently after longer periods of antigen processing. However,
depending on the MAK co-culture experiments (n = 8),
the production of IFN-gamma by MAK peaked at 24 hours and decreased at 48
hours in two experiments, likely due to a parallel decrease in MAK viability
at that time. Of note, when the MART-1 expressing HLA-A*0201 negative
MEL-XY10 cells were tested, a strong production of IFN-gamma by the M27 T
cell clone was observed after 48 hours of co-culture with DC or MAK (data
not shown), indicating that the cross-presentation observed with both DC and
MAK cells is not due to a transfer of peptide loaded onto HLA-A*0201 from
melanoma cells to APC. Gamma-MEL-XY3 cells induced only low IFN-gamma secretion
from M27 cells between 3-48 hours after irradiation when directly incubated
with these latter cells. This was expected as we previously showed that HLA-A*0201
molecules are progressively lost from the cell surface after irradiation,
impairing gamma-MEL-XY3 ability to directly stimulate phagocytes with time [17]. Specific
HLA-A*0201-restricted responses were obtained using either LPS-matured
DC loaded with the corresponding peptide or M27 stimulation with live MEL-XY3
cells. As expected, a lack of response was observed when an unrelated gp100
peptide was used. Also, only basal level of IFN-gamma was detected when MART-1
non-expressing HLA-A*0201 positive IIB-BR-G breast carcinoma cells were
used (Figure 6A and 6B).
10.1371/journal.pone.0040311.g006
Figure 6
MART-1 cross-presentation to M27 CD8+ T cell clone.
Cross-presentation assay was performed as described under Materials and Methods. For co-cultures, a 3:1 ratio
iDC (panel A) or MAK (panel B) to gamma-MEL-XY3 target cells was used and
incubation was done for the indicated times. After co-culture, M27 CD8+
T cells were added and cells were further incubated overnight. Positive controls
were either live MEL-XY3 cells or MART-1 peptide loaded mDC or MAK, incubated
with M27 cells overnight. As negative controls, gp100 peptide or IIB-BR-G
cells were used. MAK, DC and gamma-MEL-XY3 were also tested alone and with
M27 cells to measure basal IFN-gamma levels. Results are expressed as mean +-SD
pg/mL IFN-gamma released into the supernatant. One representative experiment
performed in triplicate is shown. Differences between basal levels (M27 clone+gamma-irradiated
tumor cells) and co-culture-stimulated M27 cells (either with DC:gamma-MEL-XY3
or MAK:gamma-MEL-XY3) were statistically significant from 3 to 48 hours (*
p<0.05; ** p<0.005; *** p<0.0005).

Discussion
The generation of a CD8+ T cell antitumor response requires
the presentation of antigenic peptides on antigen-presenting cells after capture
of antigens at the periphery and migration to the draining lymph nodes [18]. It needs
both naive CD4+ and CD8+ T cells to be
recruited and stimulated by antigen-presenting cells. This is achieved by
DC that have the extraordinary ability to stimulate naive CD8+
T cells through a process called cross-presentation [20] in addition to recruit
naive CD4+ T cells. Thus, immunotherapeutic trials have
focused on the manipulation of DC to trigger an antitumor immune response [42]. Different
vaccination strategies, ranging from ex vivo loading of peptides
onto DC followed by reinfusion [43], [44] to in
vivo targeting of DC with antibodies [45]-[47] or subunits
of toxins [48]
have been developed to achieve specific immunity in preclinical models and
clinical studies [11], [15], [17]. Among such
strategies one consists in the ex-vivo loading onto autologous DC of doxorubicin-treated [16] or gamma-irradiated
melanoma cells as a source of multiple antigens [15], [17], [33]. We have previously shown
that human iDC loaded with a mixture of apoptotic/necrotic gamma-irradiated
melanoma cells for 48 hours are able to cross-present MART-1 and gp100 antigens
and achieved DC maturation comparable to LPS stimulation [17]. Several reports have suggested
that apoptotic cells may be critical in processing antigens for cross-presentation,
probably by pre-selection of immunologically important antigenic determinants [49], [50]. Besides, necrotic death is
accompanied with the release of cell fragments and of a variety of molecules
that could trigger an inflammatory microenvironment and give maturation stimuli
to DC [51].
Other immunotherapeutic trials have been based on the use of macrophages.
Notably, MAK, i.e., IFN-gamma activated macrophages derived from purified
peripheral monocytes [35]
have been tested in various clinical settings [52], [53]. Although
macrophages are also potent antigen-presenting cells, their clinical use has
focused on their short-term tumoricidal activity. In particular, the ability
of human macrophages prepared for clinical use to cross-present naturally
occurring tumor-associated antigens has not been investigated. Thus, in the
present work, we analyzed whether phenotypically well-defined [32] clinical grade human macrophages
prepared ex vivo can cross-present naturally occurring tumor-associated antigen
(MART-1) after phagocytosis of apoptotic/necrotic melanoma cells and how they
compare with clinical grade DC [33].
Melanoma cell death through gamma-irradiation occurs by induction of apoptosis
and secondary necrosis, since after 70 Gy irradiation dying cells consist
of a mixture of A+/PI- and A+/PI+ cells, as we have shown
here for gamma-MEL-XY3 cells (Fig. S1). Firstly, using a high affinity
mAb specific for MART-1, 2A9 that detects MART-1 by IHC, immunofluorescence
and Western Blot in melanoma cells, the capacity of HLA-A2+
tumor cells to directly stimulate MART-1 specific CD8 T cells could be related
to the expression level of MART-1. Secondly, after coupling to Alexafluor647,
the 2A9 mAb was used to follow MART-1 fate in gamma-irradiated MEL-XY3 cells
after co-culture with either DC or MAK. MART-1 labeled material derived from
dying cells could be detected both within DC and MAK at different times after
the initiation of co-cultures. No MART-1 could be detected in co-cultures
incubated at 4degC, indicating that MART-1+ cell fragments
were captured by an active phagocytosis process (not shown). Thirdly, both
DC and MAK could cross-present MART-1, inducing similar levels of IFN-gamma
production by a HLA-A*0201 restricted CD8 T cell clone after different
times of phagocytosis. In these assays, gamma-MEL-XY3 cells alone did not
present MART-1 significantly because, as previously shown [17], HLA-A*0201 molecules
are progressively lost from the tumor cell surface during the gamma irradiation-induced
cell death. Overall, clinical-grade MAK could cross-present MART-1 as efficiently
as DC after phagocytosis of dying melanoma cells, even after a short contact
period (3 hours), based on an in vitro IFN-gamma production read-out. Whether
these cells could also act as antigen cross-presenting cells in vivo upon
re-infusion remains to be established, as the activation with IFN-gamma makes
these cells short-lived [32]
and it is unclear whether they could migrate via afferent lymphatic vessels
to secondary lymphoid structures to prime naive T cells. However, we have
recently found evidence that, in mice vaccinated with DC loaded with apoptotic/necrotic
B16 cells that achieve 80% protection against B16 challenge, a tertiary
lymphoid structure is found at the vaccination site, with the presence of
CD4+ and CD8+ T lymphocytes together with
DC as well as macrophages [30].
Thus, one can hypothesize that, in the human setting, a similar situation
could be found. Local macrophages and DC could be able to phagocyte dying
tumor cells present in the vaccines, process tumor derived antigens and cross-present
them to specific CD8+ T cells. Both DC and macrophages could
contribute to the generation of an antitumor immune response. Furthermore,
when BCG and GM-CSF are used as adjuvants [14],
the potent inflammatory stimulus that is induced may increase the presence
of macrophages at the site of vaccination. Thus, both DC and macrophages loaded
with antigens derived from dying cells could potentially contribute to the
induction of tumor-specific immunity either by priming naive T cells in the
draining lymph nodes and/or by priming effector/memory T cells in repeatedly
vaccinated patients.

Supporting Information
Figure S1
Annexin V and propidium iodide staining of gamma-MEL-XY3 cells.
Live MEL-XY3 cells (A) and gamma-MEL-XY3 cells (B) at 3, 6, 24, and 48 hours
after irradiation were stained with Annexin V and propidium iodide (PI) and
analyzed by flow cytometry as described under Materials
and Methods. Early apoptotic cells were defined as Annexin V-FITC+/PI-,
while necrotic cells were double-positive. 30,000 cells were analyzed in each
case and percentage of early apoptotic and necrotic cells are indicated in
each quadrant. A representative experiment is shown.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
