[Abstract, Methods, Methods, Mixed]

A UV-independent pathway to melanoma carcinogenesis in the redhair-fairskin background. People with pale skin, red hair, freckles, and an inability to tan--the "redhair/fairskin" phenotype-- are at highest risk of developing melanoma, compared to all other pigmentation types1. Genetically, this phenotype is frequently the product of inactivating polymorphisms in the Melanocortin 1 receptor (MC1R) gene. MC1R encodes a cAMP stimulating G-protein coupled receptor that controls pigment production. Minimal receptor activity, as in redhair/fairskin polymorphisms, produces red/yellow pheomelanin pigment, while increasing MC1R activity stimulates production of black/brown eumelanin2. Pheomelanin has weak UV shielding capacity relative to eumelanin and has been shown to amplify UVA-induced reactive oxygen species (ROS) 3-5. Several observations, however, complicate the assumption that melanoma risk is completely UV dependent. For example, unlike non-melanoma skin cancers, melanoma is not restricted to sun-exposed skin and UV signature mutations are infrequently oncogenic drivers6. While linkage of melanoma risk to UV exposure is beyond doubt, UV-independent events are also likely to play a significant role1,7. Here, we introduced into mice carrying an inactivating mutation in the Mc1r gene (who exhibit a phenotype analogous to redhair/fairskin humans), a conditional, melanocyte-targeted allele of the most commonly mutated melanoma oncogene, BRafV600E. We observed a high incidence of invasive melanomas without providing additional gene aberrations or UV exposure. To investigate the mechanism of UV-independent carcinogenesis, we introduced an albino allele, which ablates all pigment production on the Mc1r e/e background. Selective absence of pheomelanin synthesis was protective against melanoma development. In addition, normal Mc1re/e mouse skin was found to have significantly greater oxidative DNA and lipid damage than albino-Mc1re/e mouse skin. These data suggest that the pheomelanin pigment pathway produces UV-independent carcinogenic contributions to melanomagenesis by a mechanism of oxidative damage. While UV protection remains important, additional strategies may be required for optimal melanoma prevention.

METHODS SUMMARY
Mice
At 6-10 weeks of age, mice were treated topically with 20mg/ml tamoxifen for 5 days. For topical darkening, 20% coleus extract was applied as previously described17. For in vivo PLX4720 studies, animals were given ad libitum mouse chow containing 2% PLX4720 by weight. All studies and procedures involving animal subjects were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committees of Massachusetts General Hospital and Dana-Farber Harvard Cancer Center, and were conducted strictly in accordance with the approved animal handling protocol.
Morphological examination
Histology and immunostaining were performed according to established protocols using S100 (Dako), DCT (Santa Cruz), C5 MITF (tissue culture supernatant), HMB45 (Santa Cruz), and gp100 (Abcam) antibodies.
Primary Cell Culture
Primary tumor was digested overnight and grown in DMEM. Proliferation was measured by the CellTiter-Glo Luminescent Cell Viability Assay (Promega).
Quantitative RT-PCR
mRNA expression of melanocytic markers was determined using intron-spanning mouse-specific primers with SYBR FAST qPCR master mix (Kapa Biosystems).
Measurement of 8,5'-Cyclopurine-2'-deoxynucleosides
8,5'-cyclo-2'-deoxyadenosine (cdA) and 8,5'-cyclo-2'-deoxyguanosine (cdG) levels were measured as previously published24. Briefly, nuclear DNA was isolated from mouse skin, digested to nucleosides, separated by HPLC and analyzed by LC-MS/MS/MS.
Measurement of Lipid Peroxidation
Mouse skin was irradiated with UV (10J/cm2 UVA-0.65J/cm2 UVB), or visible light (180 J/cm2). After homogenization, lipid peroxidation was measured with the OxiSelect TBARS Assay Kit (Cell Biolabs).

FULL METHODS
Mice
All animals used for breeding were backcrossed a minimum of 6 generations onto the C57BL/6 genetic background (this corresponds to a >98.4% C57BL/6 congenic animal, http://jaxmice.jax.org/support/nomenclature/tutorial.html). The black (wild type), red (Mc1re/e) and albino (Tyrc/c) animals were purchased from Jackson Laboratories. K14-SCF animals were acquired from T. Kunisada. Genotyping of each litter, including the Tyr-Cre(ER)T2, BRafCA, and PTENflox/flox alleles was performed as previously published10,11. At 6-10 weeks of age the dorsal fur was trimmed using animal shears with a 0.25 mm head and the mice were treated topically with 20 mg/ml tamoxifen for 5 consecutive days. For tumor darkening, a 20% solution of Coleus forskohlii root extract (80 mM forskolin) was topically applied daily as previously described17. For in vivo PLX4720 studies, animals were given ad libitum mouse chow containing 2% PLX4720 by weight or control chow acquired from Plexxikon Inc. All studies and procedures involving animal subjects were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committees of Massachusetts General Hospital and Dana-Farber Harvard Cancer Center and were conducted strictly in accordance with the approved animal handling protocol.
Dissection and histology
Tissues of interest were photographed, excised, weighed, rinsed in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), fixed in 10% neutral-buffered formalin, rinsed in PBS, and stored in 70% ethanol. Formalin-fixed tissues were paraffin embedded (FFPE) and sectioned (3-5 mm) using standard procedures. Morphological analysis was performed using multiple independent samples per site/organ (5 to 9 samples per genotype) as well as >6 animals. Two pathologists (JKL, MPH) independently examined the histopathology of the tumor samples. Digitization and image capture was performed using an Olympus DP70 digital camera (Olympus, Tokyo, Japan) connected to an Olympus BX51 light microscope or a Scanscope whole-slide scanning system (Aperio, Vista, CA).
Immunohistochemistry
For immunohistochemistry, sections were deparaffinized with xylene and hydrated with a graded series of alcohol. Sections were boiled in 50 mM TRIS-buffer (pH9) or citrate for antigen retrieval and rinsed in PBS. Sections were blocked in 1% BSA, 0.1% Triton X-100 PBS, incubated with 1:200 dilutions of rabbit anti-S100 (Dako), 1:100 dilutions of goat anti-DCT (Santa Cruz), 1:200 dilutions of mouse-anti HMB45 (Santa Cruz) and 1:200 dilutions of mouse-anti gp100 (Abcam) antibodies, followed by visualization with appropriate secondary antibodies conjugated to Alexa594 or Alexa488 (1:500). Appropriate controls for specificity of staining were included and images were captured using an upright fluorescence microscope (Eclipse 90i, Nikon). To identify epidermal melanocytes, skin from reporter mice carrying the various pigmentation alleles and the K14-SCF transgene as well as a DCT-LacZ reporter allele was cryosectioned and stained with XGal and nuclear fast red counterstaining.
Primary Cell Culture
Tumor cells were digested overnight in 10 mg/ml collagenase and 1 mg/ml hyaluronidase. Initially tumor cells were grown in RPMI media with HEPES and 20% serum. Subsequently tumor cells were grown in DMEM media with 10% serum. Proliferation after 72 hours of PLX4720 (Chemietek) and U0126 (Cell Signaling) was determined by the CellTiter-Glo Luminescent Cell Viability Assay (Promega).
Quantitative RT-PCR
RNA was harvested from primary cultured tumor cells treated for varying times with forskolin or PLX4720 using the RNeasy Plus mini kit (Qiagen). mRNA expression of melanocytic markers was determined using intron-spanning mouse-specific primers with Kapa SYBR FAST qPCR master mix (Kapa Biosystems). Expression was normalized to 18s rRNA and 0 hour time-points. Primer sequences used: Mitf fwd GCCTGAAACCTTGCTATGCTGGAA, Mitf rev- AAGGTACTGCTTTACCTGGTGCCT, Dct fwd- AGGTACCATCTGTTGTGGCTGGAA, Dct rev- AGTTCCGACTAATCAGCGTTGGGT, Tyrp1 fwd-TGGGGATGTGGATTTCTCTC, Tyrp1 rev- AGGGAGAAAGAAGGCTCCTG, 18s fwd- AGGTTCTGGCCAACGGTCTAG, 18s rev- CCCTCTATGGGC AATTTT.
Cyclopurine quantification
Extraction of nuclear DNA from mouse skin tissues
Nuclear DNA was isolated from mouse skin using a high-salt method. Tissues were ground under liquid nitrogen into fine powder using a mortar and pestle. A nuclei lysis buffer containing 20 mM Tris (pH 8.3), 20 mM EDTA, 400 mM NaCl, 1% SDS (w/v) and 0.05% proteinase K (w/v) was added to the tissue and incubated in a water bath at 55degC overnight. Half volume of saturated NaCl solution was added to the digestion mixture, incubated at 55degC for 15 min then centrifuged at ~10,000 rpm for 30 min. The supernatant was collected and centrifuged again. The nucleic acids in the supernatant were precipitated with cold ethanol, dissolved in water and incubated in the presence of 0.03% RNase A (w/v) and 0.25 U/mL of RNase T1 at 37degC overnight, and subsequently extracted with an equal volume of chloroform/isoamyl alcohol (24:1, v/v) twice. The DNA was then precipitated from the aqueous layer by cold ethanol, centrifuged at 8,000 rpm at 4degC for 15 min, washed twice with 70% cold ethanol and dried under vacuum. The DNA pellet was dissolved in deionized water and quantified by using ultraviolet absorption spectrophotometry.
Enzymatic digestion of nuclear DNA
Nuclease P1 (16 U), phosphodiesterase 2 (0.025 U), 20 nmol of EHNA and a 30-mL solution containing 300 mM sodium acetate (pH 5.6) and 10 mM zinc chloride were added to 200 mg of DNA. In this context, EHNA served as an inhibitor for deamination of 2'-deoxyadenosine to 2'-deoxyinosine (dI) induced by adenine deaminase. The above digestion was continued at 37degC for 48 h. To the digestion mixture were then added alkaline phosphatase (10 U), phosphodiesterase 1 (0.0125 U) and 60 mL of 0.5 M Tris-HCl buffer (pH 8.9). The digestion was continued at 37degC for 2 h and subsequently neutralized by addition of formic acid. To the mixture were then added uniformly 15N-labeled standard lesions, which included 400 fmol of R-cdG, 150 fmol of S-cdG, 80 fmol of R-cdA and 40 fmol of S-cdA. The enzymes in the digestion mixture were subsequently removed by chloroform extraction twice. The resulting aqueous layer was subjected to off-line high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) separation for the enrichment of the lesions under study, following our previously described procedures26.
LC-MS/MS/MS Analysis
The LC-MS/MS/MS experiments were conducted using an LTQ linear ion trap mass spectrometer using our recently described conditions26. Briefly, the amounts of cdA and cdG lesions in each nucleoside sample were calculated based on the ratios of peak areas found in the selected-ion chromatograms for the analyte (e.g., the 23.5 min peak in the top panel of Fig. 4d for S-cdA) and the corresponding stable isotope-labeled standard (e.g., the 23.4 min peak in the bottom panel of Fig. 4d for the 15N-labeled S-cdA), the known amount of uniformly 15N-labeled standard added to the nucleoside mixture (e.g., 40 fmol for S-cdA), and calibration curves. The calibration curves were constructed from the same LC-MS/MS/MS analyses of a series of mixtures with known compositions of the unlabeled cdA, cdG and constant amounts of the corresponding uniformly 15N-labeled standards, as described previously26. The lesion formation frequencies as shown in Fig. 4e were then calculated by dividing the amounts of cdA and cdG in the sample with the total amount of nucleosides present.
Skin irradiation and lipid peroxide measurement
6-week old mice were euthanized and fur was removed using animal shears with a 0.25 mm head. Twelve sections of skin, each with an area of 1 cm2, were removed from each mouse and placed in 35mm dishes on ice after adherence to Whatman filter paper suspended in PBS. For each UV and visible light study, 6 sections of skin from each mouse were placed in the dark on ice as controls. For UV studies, 6 sections of skin from each mouse were irradiated on ice with 10 J/cm2 UVA and 0.65J/cm2 UVB at an irradiance of 6.67 mW/cm2 using a Sylvania 350 Blacklight (Osram Sylvania). This UV distribution is comparable to natural sunlight (96.65% UVA & 3.35% UVB). Two mice of each pigmentation type were used for a total of n=12 skin samples for each condition. For visible light studies, 6 sections of skin from each mouse were irradiated on ice with 180 J/cm2 visible light from a Dolan-Jenner A3200 Fiber-Lite Illuminator at an irradiance of 200 mW/cm2. The illuminator bulb was fit with a Thorlabs FEL0400 Edgepass UV filter with a transmission of <0.001% for wavelengths <400 nm, such that no irradiation output was detectable in the UV range below 400 nm. One mouse of each pigmentation type was used for a total of 6 skin samples for each condition. Following treatment, skin sections were flash frozen and homogenized in PBS containing the antioxidant butylated hydroxytoluene (BHT) to prevent further lipid peroxidation, using a Qiagen TissueLyser II. Homogenized samples were centrifuged and supernatants were collected. Protein content of each sample was determined by Coomassie Plus Protein Assay, and samples were diluted with PBS+BHT for normalization of sample concentration (Thermo Scientific). Lipid peroxidation of each irradiated set of sample was determined using an OxiSelect TBARS Assay Kit and normalized to its unirradiated control (Cell Biolabs).

Supplementary Material
supp info
