[Abstract, Introduction, Discussion]

Parallel ridge pattern on dermoscopy: observation in non-melanoma
cases*. The acral melanoma is the most prevalent type of melanoma in the non-Caucasian population, and dermoscopy is a useful tool for earlier diagnosis and differentiation from benign lesions. The dermoscopic pattern often associated with melanoma on the volar skin is the parallel ridge, with 99% specificity according to the literature. However, this pattern can also occur in several benign acral lesions, so it is important to make a good interpretation of this pattern, along with the clinical history and evolution.

INTRODUCTION
It is estimated that acral lentiginous melanoma represents 10% of all cutaneous
melanomas, being the most prevalent form of this tumor in the non-caucasian population
and corresponding to half the cases of melanoma diagnosed among Japanese patients.
Prognosis is generally bad due to the late diagnosis.1
Dermoscopy is useful to differentiate between acral melanomas and benign lesions. As
according to the literature, the dermoscopic pattern of parallel ridges has 86%
sensibility and 99% specificity to detect acral melanomas, and benign lesions often
present the parallel furrow pattern. 2,3,4
The palmar-plantar region has a thick and compact stratum corneum,
containing dermatoglyphs, formed by furrows and ridges. Histologically, the ridges
correspond to the interpapillary pegs, also known as crista profunda
intermedia where the eccrine glands ducts penetrate, and the furrows
correspond to the crista profunda limitans, that do not relate to the
eccrine ductal structures. 5,6 The dermoscopic pattern of parallel
ridges is described as an accentuated pigmentation in the deep intermediate ridges
(crista profunda intermedia), which acquire the same aspects of
parallel ridges seen on glabrous skin.3,5,7 According to the algorithm depicted by Saida,1 acquired melanocytic lesions that present
a parallel ridge dermoscopy pattern should be biopsied. However, this pattern has been
recently reported on various benign lesions. 8,9,10

DISCUSSION
The images displayed on this article illustrate the pattern of parallel ridges in one
case of racial melanosis and another case of congenital melanocytic nevus, phototypes V
and IV respectively, without obliteration of the acrosyringia, which are the superficial
openings of the eccrine glands on the epidermis (Figures
1,2,3 and 4). Some authors also found this
same pattern in lesions for which, later histopathology examination did not confirm the
clinical suspicion of acral melanoma, thus being labeled by them as "atypical
acral melanosis".8
FIGURE 1
Racial melanosis on the plantar arch of a phototype V patient
FIGURE 2
Dermoscopy showing parallel ridge pattern and mottled pigmentation area sparing
the acrosyringia aperture
FIGURE 3
Melanocytic nevus on the plantar region of a phototype IV patient, that also
presented with a congenital giant nevus on the torso )
FIGURE 4
Parallel ridge dermoscopic pattern with preservation of the eccrine glands
aperture and pigmentation on the furrows.
In congenital acral nevi, blue homogeneous or parallel ridge patterns may be observed
and Minagawa described a congenital nevus with atypical dermoscopic pattern: an
uncircumscribed, mottled, brownish pigmentation. 7 We disagree with the specificity attributed to the parallel ridge
pattern for the dermoscopic diagnosis of acral melanoma, because we have increasingly
observed benign acral lesions, such as lentiginosis, racial melanosis, melanocytic nevi,
drug-induced hyperpigmentation, subcorneal hemorrhage and dye-related pigmentation,
particularly in higher phototypes, presenting this same pattern. However, we recognize
that on lentiginous acral melanoma, the melanocytic proliferation is disseminated and
occupies the crista profunda intermedia, determining not only the ridge
pigmentation, but also the obliteration of the eccrine gland ducts, a fact that must be
considered for the differential diagnosis between benign and malign lesions. In the
racial melanosis histopathology one can observe the disseminated increase of
pigmentation at the dermoepidermal junction, without melanocytic proliferation; whilst
in the congenital melanocytic nevi there are, generally, melanocytes occupying the
papillary dermis and superficial rete dermis without injure to the acrosyringia, which
corresponds to the parallel ridge aspect without the dermoscopic blurring of the eccrine
ducts aperture.
Pigmented acral lesions often represent a diagnostic challenge, in which dermoscopy
carries an important role as it allows the identification of specific patterns of
benignancy or malignancy.
We, however, propose a critical analysis of the parallel ridge dermoscopic pattern, as
we believe that, it cannot be evaluated separately. Being a peculiar anatomical site,
much like the face, the involvement of the annexes, observed by the obliteration of the
acrosyringia, is the sign that may suggest malignancy, besides other characteristics of
the lesion and its own evolution. Further studies are necessary to better evaluate the
specificity of parallel ridge pattern or to achieve a better definition, mainly in our
country, where patients with higher phototypes represent the larger part of the
population.
