[Abstract, Results, Discussion, Methods]

Apoptosis of human melanoma cells induced by inhibition of B-RAFV600E involves preferential splicing of bimS. Bim is known to be critical in killing of melanoma cells by inhibition of the RAF/MEK/ERK pathway. However, the potential role of the most potent apoptosis-inducing isoform of Bim, BimS, remains largely unappreciated. Here, we show that inhibition of the mutant B-RAFV600E triggers preferential splicing to produce BimS, which is particularly important in induction of apoptosis in B-RAFV600E melanoma cells. Although the specific B-RAFV600E inhibitor PLX4720 upregulates all three major isoforms of Bim, BimEL, BimL, and BimS, at the protein and mRNA levels in B-RAFV600E melanoma cells, the increase in the ratios of BimS mRNA to BimEL and BimL mRNA indicates that it favours BimS splicing. Consistently, enforced expression of B-RAFV600E in wild-type B-RAF melanoma cells and melanocytes inhibits BimS expression. The splicing factor SRp55 appears necessary for the increase in BimS splicing, as SRp55 is upregulated, and its inhibition by small interfering RNA blocks induction of BimS and apoptosis induced by PLX4720. The PLX4720-induced, SRp55-mediated increase in BimS splicing is also mirrored in freshly isolated B-RAFV600E melanoma cells. These results identify a key mechanism for induction of apoptosis by PLX4720, and are instructive for sensitizing melanoma cells to B-RAFV600E inhibitors.

Results
The B-RAFV600E inhibitor PLX4720 induces apoptosis in B-RAFV600E melanoma cells
Our initial studies confirmed that the small molecule compound PLX4720 is specific for inhibition of B-RAFV600E. This was shown by its inhibitory effect on ERK activation in B-RAFV600E melanoma cell lines, but not in those carrying the wild-type B-RAF even when it was used at 10 mM (Figure 1a and Supplementary Figure 1A). The inhibitory effect of PLX4720 at 10 mM on activation of ERK was sustained till 72 h after treatment (Figure 1a). Examination of the effect of PLX4720 on cell growth similarly demonstrated that it inhibited proliferation of B-RAFV600E melanoma cells, but had only minimal effects on growth of those harboring the wild-type B-RAF (Figure 1b and Supplementary Figures 1B).
We examined whether induction of apoptosis was involved in PLX4720-mediated inhibition of cell growth in Mel-RMu (B-RAFV600E) and Mel-RM (wild-type B-RAF) cells. At concentrations of up to 1 mM, PLX4720 did not induce significant apoptosis by 72 h (Figure 1b). At 3 mM, it induced apoptosis in ~30% of Mel-RMu cells, but apoptosis in Mel-RM cells remained marginal. When it was used at 10 mM, >65% of Mel-RMu cells and ~20% of Mel-RM cells underwent apoptosis, which corresponded well with the efficiency of inhibition of cell viability in both cell lines (Figure 1b). Predominant induction of apoptosis by PLX4720 at 10 mM was confirmed by treating the cells with the compound at the same concentration for varying time periods (Figure 1c). This was also shown by activation of caspase-3 and -7, and cleavage of the caspase-3 substrate PARP (Supplementary Figure 2).
Studies in a panel of melanoma cell lines indicated that B-RAFV600E lines were, in general, significantly more sensitive to PLX4720 than those harboring the wild-type B-RAF (P<0.01; two-tailed student's t-test) (Figure 1d). Similar to PLX4720, Small interfering RNA (siRNA) knockdown of B-RAF induced apoptosis in two B-RAFV600E melanoma cell lines, indicating that induction of apoptosis by PLX4720 is due to inhibition of B-RAFV600E (Figure 1e).
PLX4720 preferentially enhances splicing of BimS
Overexpression of Bcl-2 inhibited induction of apoptosis by PLX4720 in B-RAFV600E melanoma cells, indicating that the mitochondrial apoptotic pathway is essential in PLX4720-induced apoptosis (Figure 2a). In support of this, treatment with PLX4720 resulted in activation of Bax, and mitochondrial release of cytochrome c and apoptosis-inducing factor (AIF) (Supplementary Figure 3). These results suggest that activation of one or more BH3-only proteins of the Bcl-2 family is important in initiating PLX4720-mediated apoptotic signaling.27 As shown in Figure 2b, PLX4720 caused upregulation of the Bim isoforms, BimEL, BimL, and BimS, in B-RAFV600E Mel-RMu cells, but not in wild-type B-RAF Mel-RM cells. In particular, the increase in BimS was most prominent and sustained. The changes in BimEL expression was associated with reduction in the levels of an extra band, with reduced electrophoretic motility that corresponds to phosphorylated BimEL.13 Of note, PLX4720 also induced a novel protein product with an apparent molecular weight between BimL and BimS at 36 h after treatment (Figure 2b). In contrast to regulation of Bim, PLX4720 did not cause any significant changes in other Bcl-2 family proteins analyzed, except for downregulation of the anti-apoptotic proteins Mcl-1 and Bcl-2 at relatively late stages (36 h after treatment) in Mel-RMu cells (Figure 2b). Regulation of Bim by PLX4720 was confirmed in another three B-RAF-mutant melanoma cell lines (Supplementary Figure 4).
The marked increase in BimS induced by PLX4720 was intriguing because, unlike BimEL and BimL, this isoform is not regulated by any known posttranslational mechanisms.13, 15 We reasoned that upregulation of BimS is a consequence of enhanced Bim transcription and a subsequent increase in splicing to produce BimS. To test this, we first quantitated the Bim mRNA expression before and after exposure to PLX4720. As shown in Figure 2c, PLX4720 triggered a rapid and sustained increase in Bim mRNA in Mel-RMu cells, which could be efficiently inhibited by pretreatment with actinomycin D (Figure 2c), suggesting that this was due to a transcriptional increase, rather than a change in the mRNA stability.
We next monitored the levels of the three major Bim mRNA species in Mel-RMu cells before and after exposure to PLX4720 in qPCR analysis. Figure 3a shows that, although they were all increased by treatment with PLX4720, the ratio of BimS mRNA to BimEL mRNA in Mel-RMu cells after treatment for 16 h was four times higher than that before treatment (Figure 3b). Similarly, the ratio of BimS mRNA to BimL mRNA was also increased, although to a lesser extent (Figure 3b). The increase in BimS mRNA relative to BimEL and BimL mRNA was confirmed in an additional three B-RAF-mutant melanoma cell lines (Supplementary Figure 5). Collectively, these results suggest that PLX4720 may cause preferential splicing to produce BimS.
To confirm that the increase in BimS splicing is specific to inhibition of B-RAFV600E by PLX4720, we treated Mel-RMu and Mel-RM cells with the histone deacetylase inhibitor suberic bishydroxamate (SBHA), which is known to upregulate Bim at the transcriptional level.28 Figure 3c shows that, as reported before, the Bim mRNA and protein levels were upregulated by SBHA in melanoma cells, regardless of their B-RAF mutational status. Although this increase was reflected at the levels of the three Bim mRNA species, the ratios of the BimS mRNA to the BimEL and BimL mRNA in both cell lines before and after treatment remained unaltered (Figure 3d).
Enforced expression of B-RAFV600E inhibits Bims expression in melanocytes and melanoma cells
We transfected cDNA encoding B-RAFV600E into wild-type B-RAF Mel-RM and Me1007 cells. Enforced expression of B-RAFV600E resulted in increases in activation of ERK (Figure 4a). Because the three Bim protein variants were all constitutively expressed at low levels in both cell lines, it was not feasible to judge whether enforced expression of B-RAFV600E resulted in downregulation of the proteins. To overcome this limitation, we treated the cells transfected with B-RAFV600E with SBHA, and monitored changes in the three mRNA species. Figure 4b shows that enforced expression of B-RAFV600E blocked increases in BimS mRNA induced by SBHA. Inhibition of SBHA-mediated induction of BimS by enforced expression of B-RAFV600E was also mirrored at the protein level (Figure 4c).
The effect of B-RAFV600E on the expression of the three Bim isoforms was also examined in a cultured melanocyte line that was transfected with cDNA encoding B-RAFV600E. It was notable that the BimEL, BimL, and BimS proteins were all constitutively expressed at detectable, although moderate, levels in cultured melanocytes (Figure 4d). Survival of melanocytes in the presence of these Bim isoforms is conceivable owing to sequestration of BimEL and BimL in the cytoskeleton,13, 14 and neutralization of BimS by anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 family proteins (Figure 4d).12 Consistent with its inhibitory effect on the expression of BimS in melanoma cells, enforced expression of B-RAFV600E caused a decrease in this isoform in melanocytes (Figure 4d). Intriguingly, there was an increase in the levels of BimL in melanocytes transfected with B-RAFV600E, suggesting that the effect of B-RAFV600E on regulation of Bim expression may be more complex than just impinging on BimEL and BimS, and may vary between different types of cells.
BimS has a dominant role in apoptosis of B-RAFV600E melanoma cells induced by PLX4720
To examine the relative importance of BimEL and BimS in PLX4720-induced apoptosis, we transfected siRNA specific for Bim in general, BimEL, and BimS into Mel-RMu cells (Figures 5a-c). Although siRNA knockdown of BimEL inhibited PLX4720-induced apoptosis by 30%, inhibition of BimS by siRNA blocked apoptosis induction by PLX4720 by 56% (Figure 5d). These results indicate that both BimEL and BimS are involved in induction of apoptosis of B-RAFV600E melanoma cells by PLX4720, but BimS has a greater part than BimEL. Although we did not specifically measure the role of BimL because of technical limitations in designing siRNA that specifically silences BimL, it is conceivable that this isoform also contributes to PLX4720-induced apoptosis. More potent inhibition of PLX4720-induced apoptosis by knockdown of BimS was also demonstrated in another two B-RAFV600E melanoma cell lines (Supplementary Figure 6).
To further consolidate the role of BimS in induction of apoptosis of mutant B-RAF melanoma cells, the GFP-tagged open reading frame of human BimS cDNA cloned into the pCMV6-AC vector (pCMV6-AC-BimS-GFP) was transiently transfected into Mel-RMu and Mel-CV cells (Figure 5e). Figure 5f shows that overexpression of BimS induced apoptosis of the cells that could be detected as early as 16 h after transfection. By 48 h, ~50% of the cells in both cell lines had committed to apoptosis. It is of note that BimS-GFP is readily detected in mitochondrial fractions at 24 h (Figure 5e), consistent with previous reports that BimS-induced apoptosis requires its mitochondrial localization.17 As shown in Figure 5g, exposure to PLX4720 similarly resulted in marked relocation of endogenous BimS onto mitochondria in Mel-RMu and Mel-CV cells.
The SR protein SRp55 is involved in increased splicing of BimS triggered by PLX4720 in B-RAFV600E melanoma cells
The gene encoding the SR protein SRp55, splicing factor arginine/serine-rich 6 (SFRS6), has been shown to be upregulated in B-RAFV600E melanoma cells.29 We therefore studied whether SRp55 is involved in regulation of alternative splicing of Bim in B-RAFV600E melanoma cells by inhibition of B-RAFV600E. Surprisingly, the levels of the SRp55 protein appeared similar between B-RAFV600E melanoma cell lines and those in the wild-type B-RAF (Figure 6a). However, in response to treatment with PLX4720, the levels were increased in B-RAFV600E Mel-RMu cells, but not in wild-type Mel-RM cells (Figure 6a). Similarly, treatment with PLX4720 resulted in a marked increase (fivefold) in the expression levels of the SFRS6 mRNA in Mel-RMu but not in Mel-RM cells (Figure 6b).
We next transfected a siRNA pool for SFRS6 into Mel-RMu and Mel-CV cells. Transfection of a siRNA pool for splicing factor arginine/serine-rich 12 (SFRS12) was included as a control (Figures 6c and d). Inhibition of SRp55 but not of SRrp86, blocked the increase in the BimS mRNA and protein, and the increases in the ratios of the BimS mRNA to the BimEL and BimL mRNAs was induced by PLX4720 (Figures 6e-g). This was associated with attenuation of PLX4720-induced killing in both Mel-RMu and Mel-CV cells (Figure 6h). Figure 6i shows that overexpression of SRp55 resulted in moderate levels of apoptosis in Mel-RMu and Mel-CV cells in the absence of any further treatment. This was associated with an increase in BimS to varying degrees in Mel-RMu and Mel-CV cells (Figure 6i).
PLX4720 preferentially increases BimS and induces apoptosis in fresh melanoma isolates carrying B-RAFV600E
As shown in Figure 7a, PLX4720 inhibited activation of ERK1/2 in two fresh isolates with B-RAFV600E but not in the one with wild-type B-RAF. Consistently, PLX4720 markedly reduced the viability of the B-RAFV600E cells but not of wild-type B-RAF cells (Figure 7b). Two B-RAFV600E fresh isolates were used for further studies. PLX4720 upregulated the three Bim mRNA species in both fresh isolates (Figure 7c). It also upregulated all three protein variants, except for BimL, in Mel-JG cells (Figure 7c). Notably, there were also discrepancies in the levels of other mRNA species and corresponding protein variants after treatment with PLX4720. This suggests that mechanisms other than those mediated by inhibition of B-RAFV600E may be involved in regulation of the expression of Bim protein variants. Nevertheless, similar to results with melanoma cell lines, PLX4720 triggered increases in the ratios of the BimS mRNA to the BimEL and BimL mRNAs in both fresh isolates (Figure 8a). This was associated with an increase in the levels of the SRp55 protein and the SFRS6 mRNA (Figure 8b). Inhibition of BimS by siRNA partially restored viability of the cells, whereas inhibition of SRp55 by siRNA blocked the increase in BimS and similarly inhibited killing induced by PLX4720 (Figure 8c).

Discussion
The above results extend the role of Bim in apoptosis induced by inhibition of B-RAFV600E beyond upregulation of BimEL by showing that PLX4720 triggers preferential splicing to produce BimS, which has a greater part in induction of apoptosis than BimEL.7, 8 In addition, the results demonstrate that the increase in splicing of BimS is due to a mechanism that is regulated by the splicing factor SRp55, which is increased in B-RAFV600E melanoma cells by PLX4720.
In support of previous observations,30 BimEL was upregulated by PLX4720 in B-RAF-mutant melanoma cells, which was associated with a reduction in the levels of an extra band with reduced electrophoretic motility that corresponds to phosphorylated BimEL.13 This was consistent with inhibition of activation of ERK1/2 by PLX4720,5 in that ERK1/2 can phosphorylate BimEL, thereby causing its ubiquitination and degradation by the proteasome system.13 Inhibition of this pathway has been suggested to account for a major part of the accumulation of BimEL.13, 30 Strikingly, BimL, and in particular, BimS, were also increased by PLX4720 in B-RAFV600E melanoma cells. Nevertheless, the kinetics and sustainability of upregulation of the three Bim isoforms varied from one another, suggesting that the mechanisms responsible for upregulation of the individual proteins may be different.
The marked increase in BimS induced by PLX4720 is of particular interest, in that BimS is rarely detectable at the protein level in cells.13, 16 This is presumably associated with its stronger potency in induction of apoptosis than other isoforms, as BimS is not subject to any posttranslational regulation and is instantly activated once it is expressed.13 When overexpressed, BimS can rapidly translocate onto the mitochondrial outer membrane where it recruits and activates Bax independently of inhibition of anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 family proteins.17 Further studies by real-time revealed that the BimS transcript was preferentially induced by PLX4720 in B-RAFV600E melanoma cells. Moreover, the preferential induction of splicing to produce BimS seemed to be specific for PLX4720, as treatment of B-RAFV600E melanoma cells with the histone deacetylase inhibitor SBHA, which is known to increase transcription of Bim, did not cause selective upregulation of the BimS transcript, although the levels of all three mRNA species were increased.28 The preferential splicing to produce BimS is of functional significance, in that specific inhibition of BimS resulted in a greater degree of inhibition of PLX4720-induced killing than selective inhibition of BimEL.
The preferential induction of splicing of BimS suggests that the mutant B-RAFV600E may regulate Bim alternative splicing in melanoma cells, and in particular, may suppress splicing to produce BimS. This was supported by the finding that enforced expression of B-RAFV600E in wild-type B-RAF melanoma cells blocked upregulation of the BimS transcript by SBHA, but had no effect on upregulation of the BimEL and BimL mRNA. Furthermore, enforced expression of B-RAFV600E in melanocytes resulted in decreases in the BimS mRNA and protein, but intriguingly, the levels of the BimL mRNA and protein were increased by enforced expression of B-RAFV600E These results suggest that regulation of Bim splicing by mutant B-RAF is more complex than inhibition of splicing of BimS, and may vary between different cell types. It is of interest that, in contrast to melanoma cells, melanocytes expressed readily detectable levels of BimS together with BimEL and BimL. This may indicate that BimS expression is lost during melanoma development as a consequence of mutations in B-RAF. Bim has been shown to be decreased with melanoma progression.31
Altered splicing patterns, in particular, changes in splicing patterns of apoptosis-related genes, are frequently found in various cancers.20, 21, 23 Although the mechanisms underlying this remain unclear, it is well established that alternative splicing is tightly regulated by splicing factors, including the SR and hnRNP protein families.25, 27, 32 There is a growing body of evidence showing that some protein kinases such as Akt and ERK1/2 that have important roles in cancer development also have roles in regulation of activity of SR proteins, probably by modulating their phosphorylation status.33, 34, 35 In this study, we found that one of the SR proteins, SRp55, was associated with preferential splicing to produce BimS after inhibition of mutant B-RAF by PLX4720. This was demonstrated by the findings that PLX4720 upregulated SRp55, and that inhibition of SRp55 with siRNA blocked upregulation of the BimS transcript and reversed the increases in ratios of the BimS mRNA to the BimEL and BimL mRNA induced by PLX4720. Consistently, knockdown of SRp55 partially inhibited apoptosis induced by PLX4720 in mutant B-RAF melanoma cells. Therefore, the mutant B-RAFV600E appears to regulate the expression of SRp55 that in turn has a role in regulating alternative splicing of Bim, in particular, in promoting splicing to produce BimS.
The finding that killing of mutant B-RAF fresh melanoma isolates by PLX4720 was similarly associated with upregulation of Bim, in particular, BimS, is of particular importance, in that this may reflect more closely the reaction of melanoma cells in vivo to treatment with B-RAF inhibitors. Together, the results reported in this study identify induction of BimS as a key mechanism for induction of apoptosis by PLX4720 in melanoma cells carrying B-RAFV600E. We speculate that this may be critical for long-term clinical responses to the inhibitor. Plasma concentrations of PLX4032 of around 60 mM were apparently not associated with significant adverse effects in phase I clinical trials with PLX4032,1 suggesting that the concentrations used in this study are achievable clinically.

Materials and Methods
Cell lines
Human melanoma cell lines Mel-RM, Me1007, Mel-RMu, MM200, Mel-CV, and Sk-Mel-110 have been described previously.36, 37 They were cultured in DMEM containing 5% FCS (Commonwealth Serum Laboratories, Melbourne, Vic, Australia). Melanocytes were kindly provided by Dr P Parsons (Queensland Institute of Medical Research, Qld, Australia) and cultured in medium supplied by Clonetics (Edward Kellar, Vic, Australia).
Fresh melanoma isolates
Isolation of melanoma cells from fresh surgical specimens was carried out as described previously.38 Protocols were approved by the Human Research Ethics Committee of Hunter New England Health, Australia.
Antibodies, recombinant proteins, and other reagents
PLX4720 was provided from Plexxikon Inc (Berkeley, CA, USA). It was dissolved in DMSO and made up in stock solutions of 4 mM. Actinomycin D and SBHA were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (Castle Hill, NSW, Australia). SBHA was dissolved in distilled water and made up in a stock solution of 10 mg/ml. The mouse MAbs against pERK, Bcl-2, Mcl-1, Bad, and AIF, and the rabbit polyclonal antibodies (Abs) against B-RAF were purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Santa Cruz, CA, USA). The MAb against Noxa and the polyclonal Ab against Bim were purchased from Imgenex (San Diego, CA, USA). The rabbit polyclonal Abs against PUMA, ERK, COX IV, A-RAF, C-RAF, and Bid were from Cell Signalling Technology (Beverly, MA, USA). The rabbit polyclonal Abs against SFRS6, SFRS12, and b-actin were from Sigma-Aldrich. The mouse MAbs against cytochrome c, PARP were from Pharmingen (Bioclone, Marrickville, NSW, Australia). The rabbit polyclonal anti-Bax against amino acids 1 through to 20 was purchased from Upstate Biotechnology (Lake Placid, NY, USA). The mouse MAb against Bak (Ab-1) was purchased from Calbiochem (La Jolla, CA, USA). The mouse MAb against caspase-7 and the rabbit polyclonal Ab against caspase-3 were from Stressgen (Victoria, BC, Canada). The cell-permeable general caspase inhibitor Z-Val-Ala-Asp(OMe)-CH2F (z-VAD-fmk) was purchased from Calbiochem. Isotype control Abs used were the ID4.5 (mouse IgG2a) MAb against Salmonella typhi supplied by Dr L Ashman (Institute for Medical and Veterinary Science, Adelaide, Australia), the 107.3 mouse IgG1 MAb purchased from PharMingen (San Diego, CA, USA), and rabbit IgG from Sigma-Aldrich .
Cell viability assays (MTS assays)
The cytotoxic effect of PLX4720 on melanoma cells was determined using VisionBlue Fluorescence Cell Viability Assay Kit (Biovision Inc., Mountain View, CA, USA) as described previously.38 Briefly, cells were seeded at 5000 cells per well onto flat-bottomed 96-well culture plates and allowed to grow for 24 h followed by the desired treatment. Cells were then labeled with the VisionBlue reagent and detected by Synergy two multi-detection microplate reader (BioTek, Winooski, VT, USA) according to the manufacturer's instructions.
Apoptosis
Quantitation of apoptotic cells by measurement of sub-G1 DNA content using the propidium iodide (Sigma-Aldrich) method or by Annexin-V staining was carried out as described elsewhere.36, 37
Western blot analysis
Western blot analysis was carried out as described previously.36, 37 Labeled bands were detected by Immun-Star HRP Chemiluminescent Kit, and images were captured and the intensity of the bands was quantitated with the Bio-Rad VersaDoc image system (Bio-Rad, Regents Park, NSW, Australia).
Preparation of mitochondrial and cytosolic fractions
The mitochondrial and cytosolic fractions were prepared by using Qproteome Mitochondrial Isolation Kit (Qiagen, Doncaster, Vic, Australia) according to the manufacturer's instruction. In brief, after trypsinization, cells were washed with PBS and followed by 0.9% sodium chloride solution. Cell pellets were resuspended in ice-cold lysis buffer and incubated for 10 min at 4degC on an end-over-end shaker. After incubation, cell lysates were spun at 1000 x g for 10 min at 4degC and the supernatant for cytosolic fraction was collected. Cell pellets were resuspended in disruption buffer, purification buffer, and followed by storage buffer with spins in between. The mitochondrial pellets were finally resuspended in lysis buffer for western blot analysis.
Plasmid vector and transfection
Stable Mel-RMu and Mel-CV transfectants of Bcl-2 were established by electroporation of the pEF-puro vector carrying human Bcl-2 cDNA provided by Dr David Vaux (Walter and Eliza Hall Institute, Melbourne, Vic, Australia) and described elsewhere.39 The pCDH-CMV-MCS-EF1-Puro (CD510B-1) vector carrying B-RAFV600E cDNA was kindly provided by Professor Richard Marais (The Institute of Cancer Research, UK). The pCMV6-AC-BimS-GFP vector and the pCMV6-AC-SFRS6-GFP vector were purchased from OriGene (Rockville, MD, USA). Melanoma cells were seeded at 1 x 105 cells per well in 24-well plate, 24 h before transfection. Cells were transfected with 1 mg plasmid as well as the empty vector (Sigma-Aldrich) in Opti-MEM medium (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) with Lipofectamine 2000 reagent (Invitrogen), according to the manufacturer's protocol. At 6 h after transfection, the cells were switched into antibiotic-free medium containing 5% FCS for a further 24 h. Cells were then passaged at 1:10 ratio into fresh medium for further 24 h, followed by G418 or puromycin (Sigma-Aldrich) selection.
Real-time PCR
Real-time PCR was performed using the ABI Fast 7900HT sequence detection system (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). For Bim mRNA detection, 25 ml mixture was used for reaction, which contains 5 ml cDNA sample (0.5-1 mg/ml), 300 nM forward primers for Bim 5'-TGCAGACATTTTGCTTGTTCAA-3' and b-actin 5'-GGCACCCAGCACAATGAAG-3', 300 nM reverse primers for Bim 5'-GAACCGCTGGCTGCATAATAAT-3' and b-actin 5'-GCCGATCCACACGGAGTACT-3', 200 nM probes for Bim 6FAM-CCAACAAGACCCAGCACCGCG-TAMRA and b-actin 6FAM-TCAAGATCATTGCTCCTCCTGAGCGC-TAMRA, and 9 mM MgCI2. To specifically detect individual Bim isoforms, forward primers were designed to span the junctions of exons 3 and 4, exons 2 and 4, and exons 4 and 5, which are unique to BimEL, BimL, and BimS, respectively. BimEL forward primer is 5'-GTGGGTATTTCTCTTTTGACACAGAC-3', BimL forward primer is 5'-TACAGACAGAGCCACAAGACAG-3', and common reverse primer for both BimEL and BimL is 5'-GTTCAGCCTGCCTCATGGAAG-3' BimS forward primer is 5'-TGACCGAGAAGGTAGACAAT-3', BimS reverse primer is 5'-GCCATACAAATCTAAGCCAGT-3'. Real-time PCR for three Bim isoforms was done by Fast SYBR Green Master Mix (Applied Biosystems). For SFRS6 and SFRS12, assay-on-demand for SFRS6 (assay ID: Hs00740177_g1), SFRS12 (assay ID: Hs00377948_m1), and GAPDH (assay ID: Hs99999905_m1) were used according to manufacturer's protocol (Applied Biosystems). Analysis of cDNA for b-actin or GAPDH was included as a control. The threshold cycle value (Ct) was normalized against b-actin or GAPDH cycle numbers. The relative abundance of mRNA expression of a control sample was arbitrarily designated as 1, and the values of the relative abundance of mRNA of other samples were calculated accordingly.
Small interfering RNA
The siRNA constructs for Bim, B-RAF, SFRS6, and SFRS12 were obtained as the siGENOME SMARTpool reagents (Dharmacon, Lafayette, CO, USA), the siGENOME SMARTpool Bim (M-004383-01-0010), the siGENOME SMARTpool B-RAF (M-003460-03-0010), the siGENOME SMARTpool SFRS6 (M-016067-01-0010), and the siGENOME SMARTpool SFRS12 (M-016865-01-0010). The nontargeting siRNA control, SiConTRolNon-targeting SiRNA pool (D-001206-13-20) was also obtained from Dharmacon.
To specifically knockdown BimEL and BimS, siRNAs were designed to target exons 3 and 5, which are unique to BimEL and BimS, respectively. The oligonucleotides used were BimEL sense 5'-CUGCUGUCUCGAUCCUCCAdTdT-3', BimEL antisense 5'-UGGAGGAUCGAGACAGCAGdTdT-3' BimS sense 5'-CAUAUGGUCAUUGGUGAUUdTdT-3', BimS antisense 5'-AAUCACCAAUGACCAUAUGdTdT-3' control sense 5'-GGCUGUAACUUACGUGUACUUdTdT-3', control antisense, 5'-AAGUACACGUAAGUUACAGCCdTdT-3'. Transfection of siRNA pools was carried out as described previously.39
