[Abstract, Introduction, Methods, Results, Discussion]

Functional Classification of Cellular Proteome Profiles
Support the Identification of Drug Resistance Signatures in Melanoma
Cells. Drug resistance is a major obstacle in melanoma treatment. Recognition of specific resistance patterns, the understanding of the patho-physiology of drug resistance, and identification of remaining options for individual melanoma treatment would greatly improve therapeutic success. We performed mass spectrometry-based proteome profiling of A375 melanoma cells and HeLa cells characterized as sensitive to cisplatin in comparison to cisplatin resistant M24met and TMFI melanoma cells. Cells were fractionated into cytoplasm, nuclei and secretome and the proteome profiles classified according to Gene Ontology. The cisplatin resistant cells displayed increased expression of lysosomal as well as Ca2+ ion binding and cell adherence proteins. These findings were confirmed using Lysotracker Red staining and cell adhesion assays with a panel of extracellular matrix proteins. To discriminate specific survival proteins, we selected constitutively expressed proteins of resistant M24met cells which were found expressed upon challenging the sensitive A375 cells. Using the CPL/MUW proteome database, the selected lysosomal, cell adherence and survival proteins apparently specifying resistant cells were narrowed down to 47 proteins representing a potential resistance signature. These were tested against our proteomics database comprising more than 200 different cell types/cell states for its predictive power. We provide evidence that this signature enables the automated assignment of resistance features as readout from proteome profiles of any human cell type. Proteome profiling and bioinformatic processing may thus support the understanding of drug resistance mechanism, eventually guiding patient tailored therapy.

Introduction
Metastatic melanoma has a poor prognosis
due to chemoresistance
with response rates lower than 30% in vivo and in vitro.1 Response to anticancer therapy, which means a
significant shrinkage or complete disappearance of the tumor, is monitored
throughout the course of the treatment using radiological methods
and can be quantified by the "Response Evaluation Criteria
in Solid Tumours" (RECIST) guidelines.2 For many years, the main principle in the treatment of metastatic
tumors has been the cyclic administration of high-dose chemotherapy,
which is a rather unselective strategy based on cytotoxic effects.3 Resistance to chemotherapy is the major obstacle
in the effective management of cancer diseases. In order to overcome
drug resistance, doses of chemotherapy can either be increased, intervals
shortened, or chemotherapeutic combination strategies can be chosen.
However, this may generate a potentiation of undesired side effects.4 Especially, in the case of melanoma, such strategies
may be aggravated by the manifestation of multidrug resistance to
several structurally unrelated chemotherapeutic agents such as cisplatin.
Cisplatin is a commonly used alkylating chemotherapeutic drug in cancer
therapy and targets DNA by forming of both interstrand and intrastrand
cross-links thereby initiating cell death. Two well understood mechanisms
involved in cisplatin resistance are the increased activity of efflux
pumps to reduce intracellular concentration of the drug by the adenosine
triphosphate-driven efflux pump functions of MRP-2, consequent reduction
of DNA platination in addition to the detoxification by phase II conjugating
enzymes like glutathione S-transferases and UDP-glucuronosyltransferases.
Further alterations in cellular metabolism may increase the ability
of tumor cells for DNA damage repair and apoptosis resistance.5,6
We have therefore designed a study which may identify individual
resistance features and predictive biomarker candidates for the response
to chemotherapy, which can be routinely assessed and facilitate individualized
therapy in order to improve the clinical outcome and avoid the toxicity
of ineffective therapy.2
Proteome
analysis offers two different approaches to address this
issue. In the first option, functional screenings of drug associated
binding partners, protein-protein interactions and direct measurement
of drug-induced covalent protein modifications can be performed.7 This approach was successfully applied to the
functional screening of drug associated binding partners, and for
the identification of direct interaction partners of lead compounds.8-11
In contrast, proteome profiling may allow recording the indirect
effects of a drug and thus demonstrate the reactions of a living system.
In general, two different proteome analysis approaches have been applied:
2D-gel electrophoresis quantifying separated proteins (top down) and
shot gun analysis based on the mass spectrometric identification of
proteolytic peptides (bottom up).12 For
drug resistance studies, most research groups applied two-dimensional
electrophoresis for protein fractionation followed by matrix assisted
laser desorption/ionization-time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF
MS) or electrospray ionization/quadrupole time-of-flight (ESI/QTOF)
mass spectrometry for protein identification. These methods resulted
in the identification of biomarker resistance markers for melanoma
using drug-resistant sublines of melanoma cells MeWo,1 ovarian cancer cells,13,14 breast cancer,
neuroblastoma cells15 or cervix squamous
cell carcinoma.16 Considering the high
complexity of the resulting data, Castagna et al. used a four-way
comparison with cervix squamous cell carcinoma cell line A431, here
already untreated sensitive and resistant cells were compared to the
corresponding cisplatin treated cells to investigate the drug effects.
The intersection of the differential analyses was searched for potential
resistance biomarkers.16 They followed
the rational that proteins regulated upon cisplatin treatment may
confer reactive and compensatory functions helping to avoid cell death.
Stewart et al. performed an isotope coded affinity tag (ICAT) labeling
approach followed by MS/MS analysis with nuclear, cytosolic and microsomal
fractions of the IGROV1 ovarian carcinoma cell line and its resistant
counterpart IGROV1-R10.17 They used GoMiner,
a bioinformatic tool, to support the identification of biological
processes involved in cisplatin resistance and described that proteins
involved in RNA and nucleic acid binding, processing and metabolism,
hydrolases, and MAPKKK cascade members are up-regulated in cisplatin
resistant cells.17 Cisplatin-resistant
and sensitive ovarian cancer cells were analyzed by isobaric tags
for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ), followed by liquid
chromatography- (LC-)MS/MS, and revealed a differential expression
of proteins of eight functional categories: calcium-binding proteins,
chaperones, extracellular matrix, proteins involved in drug detoxification
or repair of DNA damage, metabolic enzymes, transcription factor,
proteins related to cellular structure, and proteins related to signal
transduction.5
Adhesion molecules
within the tumor matrix comprised of collagens,
fibronectins and laminins mediated by engagement of integrin ab1, avb and a6b receptors may regulate
invasion and chemoresistance in a variety of tumors. Disruption of
the integrin ab1, avb, and a6b-effectors
talin or p130Cas by RNA interference in the oral carcinoma HN12 cells
increased cisplatin resistance, whereas targeting Dek, Src, or zyxin
reduced HN12 resistance to cisplatin.18
Obviously, no single protein can serve as a predictive biomarker
for such a complex process. Therefore, we defined an algorithm of
calculating resistance features out of a proteome profile of a given
cell line. This might help to identify proteome signatures that would
allow the identification of relevant functional cell states and support
a mechanistic understanding of drug interference. Detecting and understanding
the variety of mechanisms leading to similar pathologic features may
enable patient stratification and the subsequent development of rational
therapeutic concepts.

Materials and Methods
Cell line and Chemicals
HeLa, TMFI and A375 were obtained
from American Type Culture Collection (Manassas, VA). M24met cells
(kindly provided by Dr. R.A. Reisfeld, Department of Immunology, Scripps
Research Institute, La Jolla, CA.20 The
human melanoma cell line M24 was derived from a biopsy of a lymph
node metastasis and M24met was established from an invaded lymph node
of a nude mouse.20 HeLa cervix carcinoma
cells and TMFI melanoma cells were grown in RPMI 1640 supplemented
with 10% fetal bovine serum, 2 mM glutamine and 50 mg/mL gentamycin
sulfate. A375 melanoma cells were grown in D-MEM tissue culture medium
supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, 2 mM glutamine and 50 mg/mL
gentamycin sulfate. Cells were tested for mycoplasma contamination
(Lucetta Luminometer, Lonza) prior to their use for any of the described
experiments.
Cell Proliferation-Assay
The CellTiter
96 AQueous non-radioactive cell proliferation assay (Promega)
was used according
to the manufacturer's guidelines. In brief, M24met, A375, HeLa
and TMFI cells as well as multiple myeloma fibroblasts were plated
in 96 well plates (1500 cells per well). After 24 h, increasing concentrations
of cisplatin or a solvent control (DMSO alone) were added. After 48
h, proliferation was measured by incubating cultures with a solution
of MTS (3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-5-(3-carboxymethoxyphenyl)-2-(4-sulfophenyl)-2H-tetrazolium,
inner salt) and PMS (phenazine methosulfate) (1:20) for 2 h at 37*C. Absorbance was measured at 490 nm with an ELISA
plate reader.
Lysosomal Staining
Lysotracker Red
DND-99 (Molecular
Probes; L7528) staining of A375, HeLa, M24met and TMFI cells. Lysotracker
Red DND-99 is a fluorophore containing a weakly basic amine that selectively
accumulates in acidic compartments, which are represented by lysosomes
and exhibits red fluorescence. The assay was performed according to
the instructions of the manufacturer. M24met, A375, HeLa and TMFI
cells were seeded on coverslips, treated with DSMO or 1 mM cisplatin
for 48 h and incubated with Lysotracker Red for 1 h at 37 degC,
the images were captured by a Zeiss confocal microscope.
CytoSelect
48-Well Cell Adhesion Assay (ECM Array, Colorimetric
Format)
The Cell Biolabs CytoSelect Cell Adhesion Assay Kit
(Cell Biolabs; CBA-070) is a quantitative method for evaluating cell
adhesion to extracellular matrix proteins and was performed as described
by Hynes et al.21 A375, M24met, TMFI and
HeLa cancer cells were allowed to attach to ECM-coated well plate
for 1 h at 100.000 cells/well. Unbound cells were washed away and
the adherent cells were stained and quantified calorimetrically.
Subcellular Fractionation, 1D-PAGE, Tryptic Digest
Subcellular
fractionation was performed into the cytoplasm, nucleous
and supernatant as described recently.22 Fractions were loaded on 12% polyacrylamid gels, SDS-PAGE gels were
fixed with 50% methanol, washed and sensitized with 0.02% Na2S2O3. The gels were stained with 0.1% AgNO3 ice cold for 20 min, rinsed with bidistilled water and subsequently
developed with 3% Na2CO3/0.05% formaldehyde
as previously described.23 For tryptic
digestion samples were cut into lanes to group proteins with a similar
molecular weight. The proteins were destained, reduced and alkylated
before digestion with trypsin (sequencing grad, Roche) at 37 degC
overnight as described before.24 After
elution the peptide solutions were analyzed by LC-MS/MS measurement.
Mass Spectrometry Analysis
Extracted peptides were
separated by nanoflow LC (1100 Series LC system, Agilent, Palo Alto,
CA) using the HPLC-Chip technology (Agilent) equipped with a 40nl
Zorbax 300SB-C18 trapping column and a 75 x 150 mm Zorbax 300SB-C18
separation column at a flow rate of 400nL/min, using a gradient from
0.2% formic acid and 3% ACN to 0.2% formic acid and 40% ACN over 60
min. Peptide identification was accomplished by MS/MS fragmentation
analysis with an iontrap mass spectrometer (XCT-Ultra, Agilent) equipped
with an orthogonal nanospray ion source. The MS/MS data analysis,
including peak list-generation and spectrum identification, was done
using the Spectrum Mill MS Proteomics Workbench software (Version
A.03.03, Agilent) allowing for two missed cleavages and searched against
the SwissProt/UniProtKB protein database for human proteins (Version
12/2010 containing 20 328 entries) allowing for precursor mass
deviation of 1.5 Da, a product mass tolerance of 0.7 Da and a minimum
matched peak intensity (%SPI) of 70%. Due to previous chemical modification,
carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as fixed modification. Oxidation
of methionine was the only post-translational modifications considered.
The apparent positive matches found within the search results for
peptides having a SpectrumMill peptide score higher than 13 when using
the corresponding reversed database compared to the true database
were consistenly less than 1% (documented in the freely accessible
PRIDE XML files accessions 12 934-12 989). Peptides
scoring between 9 and 13 were included only if precursor m/z value, retention time and MS2 pattern were found
similarly in at least one of our previous experiments and the peptide
was thereby scoring above 13. With respect to protein inference, we
chose the smallest number of proteins required to explain all observed
peptides as described for ProteinProphet.25 As our protein identification algorithm includes manual selection,
we cannot calculate an exact false discovery rate.
To obtain
a rough estimate of relative protein abundances, we calculated the
average emPAI (exponentially modified Protein Abundance Index) as
described by Ishihama et al.26 for all
proteins over all biological replicates. The Cell Similarity tool
makes use of the 226 proteome profiles of human cell types/states
currently included in the CPL/MUW database and calculates the protein
matches of each cell type/state with respect to the query list. As
a result, the cells containing a higher number of matches are listed
above cells containing less matches. The Protein Cooccurrence tool
creates a two-dimensional matrix listing the percentage of cells expressing
protein B when restricting the analysis to cells expressing protein
A. These algorithms are implemented in the latest version of the GPDE
(freely available at sourceforge.net). For automated classification
of proteins according to GO annotation of biological processes we
included the terms antiapoptosis,1,16,27-29 DNA damage and response,5,27-30 double strand break repair and the different repair systems such
as nucleotide excision repair, response to unfolded proteins,14 cell junction, extracellular matrix proteins,5 focal adhesion, Ca-ion binding,16,30 chaperones,1,5,16 DNA
or nucleotide binding,15,30 glycolysis, MAP kinase activity,28,29 protein transport for instance ion channels,16 xenobiotic metabolic processes,5,30 p53
signaling,28,29 cell adhesion,17,18 cell cycle checkpoint and process,28,29 cell death,
and proliferation. This classification and all experimental results
refer to the status of the GO annotation retrieved from the uniprot
database as well as GPDE database status from February 2011.

Results
In order to learn more about potential resistance mechanisms and
to define a new algorithm to extract resistance signatures, we followed
a rather biological reasoning. First, we analyzed constitutively expressed
proteins in sensitive cells and compared the expression patterns to
cisplatin resistant cells. To gain more insight into cellular processes
we performed subcellular fractionation into cytoplasmic, nuclear and
secreted protein fractions and subsequentlya label-free proteome profiling
approach based on LC-MS/MS supporting semiquantitative assessment
of protein expression and multiple comparisons.
The final aim
of our approach was to find an algorithm calculating
resistance features out of a proteome profile of a given cell line.
The two melanoma cell lines M24met and A375 were a very powerful pair
to start with, because of the marked difference in cisplatin sensitivity.
In addition we raised the question, whether these differences in protein
expression would correlate as well in other cells with resistance
features, irrespective of the tissue of origin. Thus, we used another
cisplatin resistant melanoma cell (TMFI) in comparison to the well-established
cisplatin sensitive cervix carcinoma HeLa cells for testing this hypothesis.
Cells were fractionated into cytoplasm, nuclei and secretome and
the resulting protein identification data submitted to the PRIDE repository
(www.ebi.ac.uk/pride31,32). In addition, the
sensitive cells A375 and HeLa were challenged with cisplatin in vitro
and forwarded to proteome profiling after 48 h of treatment.
Out of a total of 3200 identified proteins, no single candidate
was found to highly correlate with the resistance properties of the
cells. Therefore, we investigated whether selected protein groups
might correlate better than single proteins. Data analysis was supported
by our CPL/MUW (Clinical Proteomics Laboratories at the Medical University
of Vienna) database which we extended with GO (gene ontology) classification
tools with regard to cell compartments and biological functions.33,34
In a first step, we compared the different cell lines, their
specific
organelle distribution and functional state by GO using the classification
tool, second we shed light on the drug effects in sensitive cells
and compared the associated protein expression profiles to those of
the basis state of the resistant cells (an overview of the entire
experimental strategy is provided in Figure 1). Establishment of resistance implies that cells may learn to cope
with new drugs by establishing specific survival strategies. We have
observed that cells eventually dying by apoptosis indeed up-regulate
survival proteins, but simply coming too late.19 A resistant tumor cell has pre-established coping mechanisms
to overcome the drug effects. A sensitive cancer cell also tries to
raise survival strategies while the cell is exposed to the anticancer
drug but is not quick enough to counter the drugs effect. Therefore,
we challenged both a sensitive and a resistant melanoma cell line
with cisplatin and monitored the stress coping strategies by shot
gun analysis. The challenge-induced proteins were subsequently compared
to those proteins specifically expressed in resistant cells supporting
the identification of a functional survival signature.
Figure 1
New strategy for detection
of resistance signatures. Preparation
of the cytoplasmic, nuclear and secereted proteins is performed with
well-characterized tumor cells and antitumor drugs (drug sensitive
and resistant cells). Supernatant collection, sterile filtration and
precipitation was performed after a 24 h incubation of the cells in
special formulated serum-free media. For shot gun proteomics, the
protein samples were separated by SDS-gel electrophoresis followed
by tryptic in-gel digestion and peptide separation by nanoflow LC.
Peptide identification is accomplished by MS/MS fragmentation analysis
and the MS/MS data are interpreted by the Spectrum Mill MS Proteomics
Workbench software. All peptides related to a single protein become
sorted accordingly in order to account for protein inference issues.
Data of various experiments are combined to obtain reference maps
of single cell types at specific states. The specificity of any single
protein expression with respect to cell types may be retrieved using
the GPDE. Overlap and specificity of proteome maps can be visualized
by accurate Venn diagrams. After pooling data of several experiments,
the proteins are classified according to defined GO terms and further
evaluated with respect to the involvement in cell survival. Selected
candidates will be clinically evaluated using targeted proteomics
techniques applied to human serum.
To narrow down the signature candidates we applied the following
criteria for each experiment, across experiment series and across
the CPL/MUW database. Referring to protein identifications, the specificity
of peptide sequences with respect to any possible protein inference
issue as well as physical peptide ionization properties (identification
of high flyers) was considered. With respect to the semiquantitative
assessment of protein abundance we have calculated the emPAI value
for each protein. The described protein alterations are based on data
derived from independent biological replicas. Furthermore, the applied
experimental strategy allowed us to perform multiple comparisons across
a large number of different cell model systems which have been analyzed
using the same methodology. This was enabled by bioinformatics evaluation
tools which have been designed by us for these specific purposes.
These self-programmed tools are presented here for the first time
and comprise the "Protein Cooccurrence" tool to determine
redundancy and the "Cell Similarity" tool to assess
a large number of different cell systems (presently 226) with respect
to the expression of selected signatures. As a consequence, we were
able to clearly discern specifically expressed proteins from commonly
expressed proteins, thus providing the expression specificity required
to define a functional signature. This signature was then tested by
the cell similarity tool to demonstrate the predictive power.
1
Classification of Proteins by GO Cell Compartments
We identified
2305 proteins in A375 cells (1703 with two or more
peptides). We identified 2253 proteins in M24met cells (1683 with
two or more peptides) (Figure 2A, D). We found
1746 proteins (1443 with >=2 peptides) in both cells.
Figure 2
Comparative
proteome profiling results of two pairs of cisplatin
sensitive and resistant cells, respectively. (A) Quantitative Venn
diagram of the number of identified proteins in A375 (pool A) and
M24met (pool B) melanoma cells specifying the number of common and
exclusively expressed proteins as well as the sum of identified peptides,
respectively. The number of peptides provides an estimate for protein
abundance, that is, the more peptides identified per protein class,
the higher the relative abundance the corresponding proteins. (B,
C) Classification summary of identified proteins and peptides in A375
and M24met melanoma cells according to GO cellular component terms.
(D) Quantitative Venn diagram of the number of identified proteins
in HeLa cervix carcinoma (pool A) and TMFI (pool B) melanoma cells,
specifying the number of common and exclusively expressed proteins.
(F, G) Classification summary of identified proteins and peptides
in HeLa cervix carcinoma and TMFI melanoma cells according to GO cellular
component terms.
We identified 1763 proteins
in HeLa cells (1287 with two2 or more
peptides). We identified 1788 proteins in TMFI cells (1245 with two
or more peptides) (Figure 2A, D). We found
1288 proteins (1176 with >=2 peptides) in both cells.
In order to determine whether the two corresponding cell pairs
have apparent differences in cell architecture, we used the standardized
GO term classification for proteins according to cell compartments
and considered group representation as well as relative protein abundance.
In M24met compared to A375 an increased representation of proteins
belonging to the cytoskeleton, endoplasmic reticulum, golgi apparatus,
lysosome, and plasma membrane (Figure 2 B,
C) was observed. Similarly, proteins belonging to cytoskeleton, the
extracellular matrix, to lysosomes, the mitochondrium and nucleolus
were found higher represented in TMFI compared to HeLa cells (Figure 2 E, F). In both cisplatin resistant melanoma cell
lines, proteins related to the lysosomal fraction and the cytoskeleton
revealed to be elevated in comparison to the sensitive counterparts.
This is in line with previous reports demonstrating the association
of cisplatin resistance with cytoskeletal15,30 and lysosomal proteins (Supporting Information  Table S1A).35 Most strikingly, different
types of cathepsins, such as cathepsin B and D were increased in both
cisplatin resistant cells (Supporting Information Table S1A, Figure 3C, D). Furthermore, the
following lysosomal proteins were regulated by cisplatin: Beta-hexosaminidase
subunit beta, LAMP-1, ras-related protein rab-14 and vacuolar protein
sorting-associated protein 4B (Suppressor of K (+) transport growth
defect 1) which additionally were found highly expressed in both cisplatin
resistant melanoma cell lines (Supporting Information Table S1A, Figure 3 C, D).
Figure 3
Lysosomal compartment
differs in sensitive and resistant cells.
Lysosomal staining of A375, M24met, HeLa and TMFI carcinoma cells,
untreated (A) and treated with 1 mM cisplatin (B). Subcellular
distribution of four lysosomal proteins are depicted in (C) in the
following fashion: each cell symbol represents the protein expression
of a single protein for a single cell type. Average emPAI values were
calculated, increased color intensities correspond to increased emPAI
values. All positive identifications were reproduced in at least three
different experiments, white fields indicate negative finding. The
inner circle represents identification in the nuclear extracts, the
outer circle in the cytoplasm and the outer frame in the secreted
protein fraction. Four proteins were selected and listed in (D).
To verify these observations we
performed lysosomal staining with
Lysotracker Red DND-99 of untreated and treated A375, M24met, HeLa
and TMFI carcinoma cell lines (Figure 3A, B).
In the cisplatin sensitive cells the lysosomes appeared rather small
granular and were located at the cellular membrane, whereas in the
resistant ones (M24 met, TMFI) the lysosomes appeared as larger spherules
mainly localized in the cytoplasm. Cisplatin treatment led to complete
abolishment of lysosomal staining in the sensitive cells, while in
the M24met and TMFI melanoma cells the lysosomes seemed rather unaffected
(Figure 3B). The average emPAI, a semiquantitative
abundance factor for MS based protein identifications, of four lysosomal
proteins, upregulated in the cisplatin resistant melanoma cells, is
represented by symbols as follows: a small inner circle for the nuclear
fraction, an outer circle for the cytoplasm and an outer frame for
the secretome (Figure 3C, D). The corresponding
emPAI values are listed in Supporting Information Table S5.
2
Classification of Proteins
by GO Molecular Functions
In order to perform functional
correlation we made a choice of
functional classes which have already been associated with cisplatin
resistance. These GO-defined functional classes are listed in the Materials and Methods section.
In comparison
to A375, the M24met melanoma cells expressed higher amounts of proteins
belonging to the following classes (Supporting
Information Table S1 A-G): cell junction, ECM, focal
adhesion, Ca2+ ion binding, MAP kinase activity, and cell
adhesion (Figure 4A, B). In case of TMFI melanoma
cells compared to HeLa cells (Supporting Information Table S1 A-G) this applies to: cell junction, ECM, focal
adhesion, Ca2+ ion binding, MAP kinase activity, protein
transport, xenobiotic metabolic processes, cell adhesion, and cell
cycle process (Figure 4C, D). The overlap for
both comparisons was found to be cell junction, cell adhesion, focal
adhesion, ECM proteins, Ca2+ ion binding, and MAP kinase
activity.
Figure 4
Comparative proteome profiling identified different distributions
of members of GO functional process families in cisplatin sensitive
and resistant cancer cell lines. As in Figure 2, both the number of proteins and peptides are indicated. (A, B)
Classification summary of A375 and M24met melanoma cells. (C, D) Classification
summary of HeLa and TMFI cells. All classifications are used by the
standardized GO annotation.
Remarkably, cell junction, cell adhesion, focal adhesion,
and ECM
proteins are closely related and may be considered as adherence proteins.
Furthermore, Ca2+ ion binding is a basic requirement for
adherence processes.
To list examples, in the group of cell
junction alpha-synuclein,
cytochrome c1, catenin delta-1, filamin-A, ras-related protein Rap-1b,
septin-11, VAMP-2, cell division cycle and apoptosis regulator protein
1, gelsolin, spectrin alpha chain, and thrombospondin-2 were apparently
elevated or exclusively expressed in both cisplatin resistant cell
lines (Supporting Information Table S1B).
Cisplatin treatment induced the increased expression of the following
proteins: glycylpeptide N-tetradecanoyltransferase 1, VAMP-3, annexin
A4, calnexin, calpain-1 catalytic subunit, protein S100-A16, reticulocalbin-1,
spectrin alpha chain (Supporting Information Table S1B). Cytochrome c1,15 calnexin5 and reticulocalbin-130 were already described to be associated with cisplatin resistance.
Cell adhesion proteins such as integrins a1b1, avb, a6b,
effectors p130Cas, Src, and talin were already described in the context
of cisplatin resistance.18 Here, we as
well identified a panel of integrins in the resistant melanoma cells
such as integrin a2, a3, av, and b1 (Supporting
Information Table S1C). In addition different types of collagens,
cadherin-1 and 13, catenin alpha-1 and delta-1 were found to be highly
expressed in cisplatin resistant melanoma cell lines (Supporting Information Table S1C).
In the
group of focal adhesion caldesmon was found exclusively
expressed in the cisplatin resistant melanoma cell lines. Luc7-like
protein 3 (Cisplatin resistance-associated-overexpressed protein)
was identified with three peptides in the cisplatin resistant melanoma
cell line TMFI (Supporting Information Table
S1D). In line with published data linking talin with cisplatin resistance,18 talin-2 was found expressed only in the M24met
melanoma cells (Supporting Information Table
S1D).
Alpha-synuclein, glia-derived nexin and the structural
maintenance
of chromosomes protein 3 are ECM proteins characteristic for both
cisplatin resistance melanoma cell lines. This also applies to MMP-1,
secreted frizzled-related protein 1, SPARC, and spondin-2, all known
to be involved in neoplastic processes (Supporting
Information Table S1E).
The largest group was represented
by the Ca 2+ binding
proteins. Here, especially groups of alpha-actinins, annexins A3-7,
and calcium-binding mitochondrial carrier proteins Aralar 1, 2, and
SCaMC-1, not yet associated with cisplatin resistance, and 6 types
of S100-A proteins17 were found differentially
expressed (Supporting Information Table
S1F). While S100-A4 was described to be associated with resistance,30 our data rather list the S100 proteins S100-A1,
8, 10, 13, 1, and B to be elevated in the cisplatin resistant melanoma
cell lines (Supporting Information Table
S1F). However, in line with recent literature linking calreticulin
to cisplatin resistance, we also identified calreticulin to be elevated
in the M24met melanoma cell line.15
Members of the MAP kinase pathway including ubiquitin carboxyl-terminal
hydrolase isozyme L114 were also found
to be elevated in both cisplatin resistant melanoma cell lines (Supporting Information Table S1G). In Table S2,
the proteins of all seven categories which are either found to be
elevated in both resistant cell lines or induced upon cisplatin treatment
are listed.
Since five of the six categories belong to cell
adherence function
we reevaluated the ability of the cells to interact with extracellular
matrix proteins by a cell adhesion assay. Here, a 48 well plate coated
with extracellular matrix proteins such as Fibronectin, Collagen I,
IV, Laminin I, and Fibrinogen (Figure 5A) was
evaluated for the capability of the cells to adhere to these ECM proteins.
Indeed, the cisplatin resistant cells adhered in a much stronger manner
to fibronectin and both collagen subtypes, while there was no significant
difference in case of laminin and fibrinogen in comparison to the
sensitive cells (Figure 5A, B). In comparison
to all evaluated cancer cells, M24met exhibited the highest capability
to adhere to ECM proteins (Figure 5A, B). Remarkably,
fibronectin was exclusively detected in the cisplatin resistant cells,
while there was no difference in the expression of laminin-1 as demonstrated
in the subcellular distribution (Figure 5 C,
D). Three additional ECM proteins, apparently up-regulated in the
cisplatin resistant cancer cells, are visualized by the subcellular
distribution pattern (Figure 5C, D). The corresponding
emPAI values are listed in Supporting Information Table S5.
Figure 5
Differential capability of cell adherens in sensitive and resistant
cells. A375, M24met, TMFI and HeLa cells seeded at 100.000 cells/well
were allowed to attach to ECM-coated well plate for 1 h. Unbound cells
were washed away and the adherent cells were stained (A) and ECM-
mediated cell adhesion was quantified at OD 560 nm after extraction
(B). The corresponding ECM proteins fibronectin (1), laminin (3),
collagen IV (4) and three additional ECM proteins are depicted identifying
the subcellular distribution as explained in Figure 4 (C, D).
3
Evaluation
of Survival Mechanisms
To
evaluate survival mechanisms we adhered to the following rationale:
If a cell enters a different functional state it may require proteins
not expressed under normal conditions. If a cell is exposed to a specific
drug the cell responds in a specific way dependent on the basal protein
expression with the aim to cope with the drug. As a consequence, the
identification of such specifically induced proteins may identify
survival or resistance mechanisms and thus indirectly reflect the
acting profile of the investigated compound. Therefore, to characterize
resistance signatures, we compared constitutively expressed proteins
in the cisplatin resistant melanoma cell line M24met with cisplatin-induced
proteins in the sensitive melanoma cell line A375. This strategy identified
42 proteins which were again assigned to specific processes including
lysosomal and Ca2+ ion binding proteins, and proteins involved
in transport, binding, DNA damage, mRNA processing, metabolic/enzymatic
processes, and mitochondrial metabolism (Supporting
Information Table S3, Figure.6C). The
expression of all 42 candidates is visualized in the M24met and A375
melanoma cell line control versus cisplatin treated in their expression
level and cellular distribution (Figure 5 A
and B). Here it is easy to distinguish that all candidates are not
constitutively expressed in A375 in contrast to M24met melanoma cells.
Three candidates were strongly regulated in a reverse fashion: The
lysosomal protein Tripeptidyl-peptidase 1, U6 snRNA-associated Sm-like
protein LSm6 and uncharacterized protein C11orf73 are highly expressed
in the cisplatin resistant melanoma cell line M24met and downregulated
upon cisplatin treatment (Figure 6 A, B). The
corresponding emPAI values are listed in Supporting
Information Table S5.
Figure 6
Constitutively expressed proteins in M24met
and cisplatin induced
in A375 melanoma cell line as possible survival and resistance candidates.
(A, B) Subcellular distribution of all constitutively expressed proteins
in M24met and cisplatin induced in A375 melanoma identified at least
in two independent experiments is indicated. (A) Cellular distribution
of these proteins in M24met melanoma cell line treated with solvent
control or cisplatin (1 mL/ml) for 48 h. (B) Cellular distribution
of these proteins in A375 melanoma cell line treated with solvent
control or cisplatin (1 mL/ml) for 48 h. The proteins are listed
from left to right in following order given by the accession number
of the proteins: O00754, O14773, O14974, O15260, O15498, O75071, P02792,
P05362, P07686, P09110, P11279, P16401, P22570, P35659, P36957, P49406,
P61619, P62312, P82664, Q02978, Q04446, Q14004, Q14197, Q14694, Q15293,
Q16643, Q16698, Q2VIR3, Q53FT3, Q70UQ0, Q8IYD1, Q8N5M4, Q8WWI1, Q92466,
Q9BTW9, Q9HAN9, Q9NYV4, Q9NZB2, Q9UID3, Q9UIJ7, Q9Y4P3, Q9Y5J7 (C-F).
Classification of these proteins by cellular processes (C), enzymatic
activity (D), binding activity (E), and pathology, disease (F) as
main categories identified. The diagram displays the percentage distribution,
proteins can be assigned to more than one category. (G,H) Classification
by GO annotation of biological processes (G) and molecular function
(H).
In line with the data shown in
Table S1A, we again identified the
lysosomal proteins LAMP-1 and Beta-hexosaminidase subunit beta as
well as reticulocalbin, the Ca2+ binding protein as possibly
involved in cell survival. A whole list of proteins known to be involved
in DNA damage is listed including ATM- related (ATR) kinases,36 DNA damage-binding protein 2 and ubiquitin carboxyl-terminal
hydrolases, which mediate the p53 dependent DNA damage response. 29%
of the assigned candidates exert enzymatic activity (Figure 6C), which can be subdivided into transferases, oxidoreductases,
hydrolases, and proteases (Figure 6D). These
results are in line with a recent proteomic study demonstrating that
ligase, hydrolase, kinase, protease, oxidoreductase, transferase,
lyase, phosphatase, or enhanced isomerase activity can be linked to
an enhanced cisplatin resistance.15
Thirty out of the 42 proteins have binding activity which mainly
can be assigned to GTP/ATP/nucleotide, protein, metal iron binding,
RNA, p53, or DNA binding (Figure 6E).
Twelve proteins can be associated to a specific disease belonging
to the categories storage disease, cancer, neurodegeneration, or disease
mutation (Figure 6F). In addition, these 42
proteins can also be classified by GO into biological processes and
molecular function, revealing the groups listed before such as transport,
DNA repai,r or Ca2+ binding (Figure 6G, H).
Several of these candidates have already been associated
to survival
and resistance as outlined in the following: The mRNA expression of
Synatobrevin YKT 6 (Supporting Information Table S3) was found related to resistance to docetaxel. ICAM-1,
listed in Table S3, is known to be associated with an activation of
the PI3K/AKT pathway, and mediates survival of metastatic melanoma
cells37 as well as multiple myeloma cells.38 The chromatin remodeling factor DEK (Supporting Information Table S3) plays a key
role for the maintenance of malignant phenotypes of melanoma cells39 and was identified by proteome analysis to be
involved in cisplatin resistance.18 Constitutive
coactivator of PPAR-gamma-like protein 1 is known to be a critical
component of the oxidative stress-induced survival signaling and was
identified as possible cisplatin resistance candidate (Supporting Information Table S3). 1,4-alpha-glucan-branching
enzyme plays an important role in increasing the sb olubility of the
molecule and, consequently, in reducing the osmotic pressure within
cells and might be involved in regulating cisplatin entrance into
the cell (Supporting Information Table
S3).
4
Candidate Selection and Verification of the
Resistance Signature
The three main categories presently
described to be associated with resistance were lysosomal proteins,
cell adherence, and survival proteins. The CPL/MUW database allows
us to calculate whether the expression of a protein is highly correlating
or not with the expression of any other protein of choice (protein
co-occurrence). As a result, proteins with distinct expression patterns
may be discerned from groups of proteins with highly correlating expression
patterns (Figure 6). This allowed the selection
of a few representatives out of each group of highly correlating proteins
in addition to the nonredundant candidates resulting in a final choice
of a resistance signature proteins listed in Supporting
Information Table S4.
The large number of cells represented
in the CPL/MUW database allowed us to test the relevance of the protein
signature using a cell similarity algorithm. Different cell types
were ordered according to the extent of expression of the signature
(Figure 7). Out of 226 different cell types
and cell states represented in the database, the tumor associated
bone marrow fibroblasts of multiple myeloma ranked in between M24met
and TMFI melanoma cells. Remarkably, when testing these cells for
cell viability and proliferation in response to cisplatin treatment,
the proliferation curves of the five investigated cells very well
reflected the ranking obtained from proteome profiling using the resistance
signature (Figure 7).
Figure 7
Correlation of the signature
to cell response. Proteins of the
three main categories lysosomal, cell adherens and survival proteins
upregulated in both resistant cell lines were tested for redundancy
by the bioinformatic tool called protein cooccurence. A minimum redundant
list of proteins of each group was selected. Furthermore, selected
proteins were included if the corresponding protein class was found
to be affected. The resulting cisplatin resistance signature was then
inserted into the bioinformatic tool called cell similarity which
sorts cell types contained in the database according to the completeness
of expression of the protein list used for the query. Unexpectedly,
multiple myeloma fibroblasts were found to express a large number
of proteins contained in the signature. Here, the extent of expression
of the resistance signature is correlated with cell survival when
challenged with cisplatin. Indeed, the newly investigated fibroblasts
were listed exactly as predived by the signature.

Discussion
A high incidence for drug resistance is
characteristic for melanoma,
which is therefore a highly suitable model to study resistance mechanisms.
Understanding the pathophysiology of the underlying mechanisms of
intrinsic and acquired resistance will be necessary to define patient
subgroups and to define novel therapeutic treatment options.40
Cisplatin is a commonly used alternative
to the standard dacarbacine
therapy. Melanoma displays marked resistance to the DNA-damaging effects
of these drugs.40 Cisplatin resistance
has been associated with an elevated expression of glutathione S transferase
(GST) or related enzymes, but in case of melanoma an increased activity
of GST was not found to correlate with resistance.27 Therefore, melanoma resistance can hardly be comprehended
with known resistance patterns and seems to be extremely complex.
Several studies started to employ global approaches such as 2D
gel electrophoresis and rather few dealt with mass spectrometry. Here
we applied comparative proteome profiling using selected cell culture
model systems to define drug resistance signatures which may help
to predict therapeutic success. Therefore, we have designed a more
complex analysis strategy referring to proteome profiles including
cytoplasm, nuclear and supernatant fractions of two independent pairs
of sensitive and resistant carcinoma cell lines which were analyzed
untreated and after stimulation with cisplatin which is outlined in
Figure 1. Thus this is the first multistep
experimental approach referring to several cell systems, to different
subcellular fractions, comparing untreated and challenged cells and
using a standardized shot gun proteomics methodology to gain the most
unbiased answer.
This was enabled by bioinformatics evaluation
tools which have
been designed by us for these specific purposes. These tools are presented
here for the first time and comprise the "Protein Cooccurrence"
tool to determine redundancy and the "Cell Similarity"
tool to assess a large number of different cell systems (presently
226) with respect to the expression of selected signatures. As one
of the main observations, lysosomal proteins were higher expressed
in the cisplatin resistant tumor cells. Lysosomal staining confirmed
the shot gun data in a way that lysosomes were found augmented in
the resistant cells which may indicate an improved elimination of
the chemotherapeutic drug. Remarkably, we observed characteristic
morphological features and subcellular locations of the lysosomes
in the resistant cells. In addition proteins with cell adherence functions
were found to correlate with resistance. These proteome profiling
data were independently verified by the cell adhesion assay as the
resistant cells expressed more integrins mediating ECM contacts as
well as the ECM proteins which they actually bind to. Two different
hypotheses may conceivably point out the importance of cell adherence
functions in resistance mechanisms. Resistant cells eventually gain
the ability to metastasize, which is the most threatening step in
melanoma progression. For this step, the cells need to become independent
from binding to the host-derived ECM. To that aim, they produce the
ECM proteins necessitated for their own survival and to support "microenvironmental
mimicry", furthermore they degrade ECM proteins from the host
tissue. The present proteome profiling results suggests that resistant
tumor cells may change their ECM expression phenotype in order to
evade immune responses and evade drug effects. This observation further
supports the interpretation that a gain of metastatic capabilities
is accompanied by increased drug resistance.41
The detection of survival proteins was based on the consideration
that cells may produce specific proteins to exert specific functions.
When cells encounter unusual situations, they try to adjust by expressing
proteins which may help to deal with the new situation. Such proteins,
specifically synthesized on demand, may indicate characteristic disease
states and may thus serve as diagnostic markers. This was already
suggested for YKT 6, which was described to be up-regulated in p53-mutated
breast tumors and to be potentially useful in identifying the subset
of breast cancer patients who may or may not benefit from docetaxel
treatment.42
Furthermore, ICAM-1
positive tumors of clinic stage I patients
have been noticed to have a significantly shorter disease free interval
and survival time than patients with ICAM-1 negative tumors.43
We also identified the chromatin remodeling
factor DEK which is
known to be increased in metastatic melanomas. Although the functional
relevance remains unclear, a key role of DEK seems to be the maintenance
of malignant phenotypes of melanoma cells39 and was already suggested by a proteome analysis study to be involved
in cisplatin resistance.18 Secchiero et
al. demonstrated that strategies aimed to down regulate DEK might
improve the therapeutic potential of these drugs.44
Inhibitor of nuclear factor kappa-B kinase-interacting
protein
is a target of TP53/p53 and exerts a pro-apoptotic function (Uniprot).
It shares a common promoter with apoptotic protease activating factor-1
(APAF1), which is associated with cisplatin resistance (Supporting InformationTable S3). Cytochrome-C
interacts with Apaf-1 to form the apoptosome. Remarkably, the increased
expression of these pro-apoptotic proteins which finally promote DNA
fragmentation was recently shown to correlate with melanoma resistance.27,45,46 We interpret these observations
as follows: Downregulation or abrogation of a survival pathway may
activate a feedback loop resulting in an induction of agonists for
compensation. Hence, the accumulation of a mechanistic agonist in
cancer cells may well indicate that the corresponding mechanism is
impaired.
Based on these and many more findings presented here,
the list
of lysosomal, cell adherence, and survival proteins was filtered by
bioinformatic tools to a functional resistance signature whose predictive
power has been demonstrated with a comparative cytotoxic assay. Obviously,
the combination of different features rather than single mechanism
or single features may enable the prediction of specific chemoresistance
features.
The next challenge will be to evaluate the candidate
marker proteins
in additional melanoma sensitive and resistant cell lines, tissue,
and serum samples of melanoma patients.
To evaluate such markers
in blood samples for the predictive power,
selected reaction monitoring (SRM) may be the method of choice. SRM
is a label-free mass spectrometry-based quantification method with
optimal sensitivity and accuracy and serves as a robust method for
selective measurement of low abundant proteins as demonstrated for
instance by Kim et al. measuring superoxide dismutase 1 in cisplatin-sensitive
and cisplatin-resistant human ovarian cancer cells.47 We are currently establishing SRM methods with a triple-quad
mass spectrometer for the selected marker proteins. The experimental
verification using patient-derived samples shall finally prove whether
the concomitant quantification of a larger number of marker proteins
may result in the required sensitivity and specificity (Figure 1).
In current clinical melanoma research,
the relevance for understanding
the mechanisms of drug resistance and to define novel concepts for
patient stratification and therapy combinations is evident. This relevance
may be highlighted considering a promising new cancer drug, the RAF
inhibitor PLX4032 which is realizing dramatic clinical responses up
to complete remission. However, relapse may occur within few months
after therapy. Therefore we intend to apply the presently described
algorithms to identify resistance signatures to this highly relevant
clinical topic. If successful, these strategies may not only provide
predictive and pharmakodynamic biomarkers identifying individual dispositions
for chemoresistance and allowing to monitor therapy effects, but also
devise individualized targeted interventions by understanding the
pathomechanism.
