[Abstract, Introduction, Methods, Results, Discussion, Discussion]

Dermoscopic features of thin melanomas: a comparative study of melanoma
in situ and invasive melanomas smaller than or equal to 1mm*. BACKGROUND  Dermoscopy allows the early detection of melanomas. The preoperative determination of Breslow index by dermoscopy could be useful in planning the surgical approach and in selecting patients for sentinel lymph node biopsy.    OBJECTIVES  This study aims at describing the dermoscopic features of thin melanomas and comparing melanomas in situ with invasive melanomas less than or equal to 1 mm thick.    METHODS This was an observational retrospective study in which the dermoscopy photographs of 41 thin melanomas were evaluated. Three observers evaluated together 14 dermoscopic criteria.    RESULTS  Among thin melanomas, the most frequent criteria were presence of asymmetry in two axes in 95% of cases (39 cases), 3 or more colors in 80.4% of cases (33 cases), atypical dots or globules in 58.5% of cases (24 cases) and atypical network or streaks in 53.6% of cases (22 cases). The group of invasive melanomas presented with a higher frequency and statistical significance (p <0.05) 3 or more colors (OR: 16.1), milky red areas (OR: 4.8) and blue-white veil (OR: 20.4), and a greater tendency to have streaks or atypical network (OR: 3.66).    CONCLUSIONS  Thin melanomas tend to have asymmetry in the two axes, 3 or more colors, atypical dots or globules and atypical network or streaks. Melanomas in situ tend to have up to 2 colors, no blue-white veil and no milky red area. Invasive melanomas tend to have 3 or more colors, a milky red area, blue-white veil, and atypical network or streaks. Further studies are needed to confirm these findings.

INTRODUCTION
Melanoma is an aggressive skin cancer. Even though it is highly mortal, it can be
curable and its prognosis can be considered good if the disease is detected at an early
stage.1 It affects mainly
Caucasians, although this type of cancer affects all ethnic groups at different
rates.1 It is estimated that in
2012 the incidence of melanoma in Brazil was 3,170 new cases in men and 3,060 in
women.1 The highest estimated
rates are found in the South region of the country.1 Therefore, studies of the population of this region are of great
value.
Considering that current therapies against advanced melanoma are not very effective,
early diagnosis and intervention are valuable to reduce mortality. Dermoscopy is a
noninvasive technique that allows the visualization of structures in
vivo, from the epidermis to the papillary dermis, that are not seen with the
naked eye. Dermoscopy is more accurate than clinical examination; it increases
sensitivity in up to 10-27%, making the earlier detection of melanoma
possible.2,3 Besides increasing diagnostic accuracy, it reduces the
rate of excision of benign lesions that may be similar to melanoma when seen with the
naked eye.4
In 1970, Breslow described a simple method to measure the depth of melanoma invasion by
means of pathological examination.5
The Breslow index is still the simplest and most useful single variable related to
prognosis.6 The current staging
system for melanoma of the American Joint Committee on Cancer uses the Breslow index as
the primary attribute of classification. It applies a cut-off of 1.0 mm instead of the
initial cut-off of 0.76 mm used by Breslow.5,7 Melanomas up to 1 mm
thick are defined as thin melanomas because they have a good prognosis, with an 85 to
90%7 chance of a
10-year-survival after surgical excision with a margin of 1 cm.8
Thin melanomas include melanomas in situ and invasive melanomas with a
depth less than or equal to 1 mm. Melanoma in situ is a diagnostic
entity surgically treated with 0.5 cm margins, and there have been no deaths resulting
from melanomas in situ that were properly excised.8 These same surgical margins are
recommended in Brazil by the Brazilian Melanoma Group.9 Moreover, the Breslow index is one of the criteria used
in selecting patients for sentinel lymph node biopsy (SLNB).9,10 Whenever
possible, SLNB is recommended before wide excision of the primary tumor to minimize
destruction of the lymphatic vessels.11 Recognition of thin melanomas is also important considering that
elective lymph node dissections and extensive staging evaluations are not recommended
for patients with thin melanoma.8
Preoperative assessment of the Breslow index by dermoscopy and knowledge of the
dermoscopic features of thin melanomas may be important in planning the surgical
approach and in selecting patients for SLNB at the time of tumor excision. This study
aims at describing the dermoscopic features of thin melanomas and evaluating whether
there are differences between melanomas in situ and invasive melanomas
less than or equal to 1 mm thick. No similar Brazilian studies have been found in the
literature.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
This was an observational retrospective study. The study included a convenience sample,
and the digital photographic record of the dermoscopic images of 41 thin melanomas (less
than or equal to 1 mm thick) was evaluated, totaling 35 patients, dated from 2006 to
March 2012. All the patients seen at the Outpatient Clinic of Dermoscopy and Melanoma
(Hospital University, Federal University of Santa Catarina) with at least one diagnosis
of thin melanoma were considered for data collection. The data were collected from 2011
to March 2012. Patients who did not have a photographic record prior to excisional
biopsy, whose record was not adequate or who had undergone an incisional biopsy before
the photographic record were excluded from the study. Due to the dermoscopic
characteristics of the so-called specials areas (scalp, face, palms, soles and mucous
membranes), only lesions in the neck, trunk and limbs were included.
All dermoscopic images were obtained using the Heine Delta 20(r) Dermatoscope
(Heine(r), Germany), with alcohol-gel as linkage fluid. A Nikon
UR-E15(r) adapter (Nikon(r), Japan) was used to connect to a
Nikon(r) E8400 camera (Nikon(r), Japan). In cases of large lesions
that could not be included in only one photographic field, multiple images of different
areas were obtained to record all tumor areas. Three different observers, blinded to the
Breslow index, analyzed the images.
Data such as sex, age, Breslow index and histological type were collected. Through
observation of the lesion on the computer, the observers agreed with regard to the
presence or absence of the following criteria: asymmetry in 1 or 2 axes, atypical
network, streaks, atypical dots, atypical globules, pseudopods, blotches, blue-white
veil, structureless area, atypical vessels, milky red area, island, peppering and white
scar-like area. For more objectivity, atypical network and streaks were grouped into the
same criterion, as well as atypical dots and atypical globules. When there was an
island, its type was also noted. The dermatoscopic features associated with the
diagnosis of melanoma in this work have been described in previous studies (Table 1).12-16 The SPSS (Statistical
Package for Social Sciences) version 17.0 was used in the statistical analysis, with a
confidence interval of 95% and statistical significance of p <0.05. To assess the
differences between groups, the chi-square test was applied. For variables with fewer
than 5 events, Fisher's exact test was used to calculate p. Considering variables for
which no event was observed, the value for the calculation of p and OR (odds ratio) was
0.5.
Ethical aspects
This study was approved by the Human Research Ethics Committee of the Federal
University of Santa Catarina under certificate number 893 and was conducted according
to the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki.

RESULTS
Forty-one (41) thin melanomas were evaluated. They were identified in 35 patients (14
men and 21 women), with a mean age of 57.1 years (24-86 years). Seventeen cases were of
melanoma in situ (41.5%). The average thickness of melanomas, when
invasive, was 0.47 mm (standard deviation of 0.2). Of the total, 75% of invasive
melanomas had a Breslow index of up to 0.53 mm. Thirty-seven lesions were classified as
superficial spreading. The other melanomas (5 cases), all in situ, were
of the lentigo maligna type.
With regard to the analyzed dermoscopic structures, the following criteria were more
frequently observed in all thin melanomas (in situ and invasive):
presence of asymmetry in two axes in 95% of cases (39 cases), 3 or more colors in 80.4 %
of cases (33 cases), atypical dots or globules in 58.5% of cases (24 cases) and atypical
network or streaks in 53.6% of cases (22 cases). The least frequent structures were
blotches in 2.4% of cases (1 case), pseudopods in 4.9% of cases (2 cases) and island in
7.3% of cases (3 cases). All cases of island were of the reticular type. Table 2 details the frequency of each criterion by
group: melanomas in situ, invasive melanomas less than or equal to 1 mm
thick, and the set of all melanomas. Considerable differences were found between the
first two groups. The group of invasive melanomas presented with greater frequency and
statistical significance (p <0.05) 3 or more colors (OR: 16.1), milky red areas (OR:
4.8) and blue-white veil (OR: 20.4). Atypical network or streaks tend to be more
frequent in the group of invasive melanomas (OR: 3.66). Regarding the other
characteristics analyzed, there were no differences between the groups.
Figure 1 shows the dermoscopic characteristics
found in melanomas in situ, while figures 2 and 3 show the
characteristics observed in invasive melanomas less than 1 mm thick.
FIGURE 1
Lentigo maligna melanoma in situ on the foot. Dermoscopy shows asymmetry in two
axes, two colors, atypical dots and globules and structureless area
FIGURE 2
Superficial spreading melanoma with a Breslow index of 0.5 mm in the cervical
region. Dermoscopy shows asymmetry in two axes, four colors, atypical globules,
streaks, and milky red area
FIGURE 3
Superficial spreading melanoma with a Breslow index of 0.9 mm on the forearm.
Dermoscopy shows asymmetry in two axes, 4 colors, atypical network, streaks,
atypical dots and globules, bluewhite veil, and multiple blue-gray dots

DISCUSSION
The Breslow index is a simple and objective measure. Since it is the most useful
criterion related to prognosis, it determines surgical margins and the selection of
patients for SLNB. Preoperative assessment of the Breslow index using noninvasive
methods has been the subject of previous studies.17-23 According to the
literature, melanomas <0.76 mm show a pigmented network more frequently than thicker
melanomas, and melanomas >0.76 mm more frequently exhibit atypical vessels and
blue-gray areas.18,19,21
All the thin melanomas in our study showed asymmetry in two axes, 3 or more colors,
atypical dots or atypical globules and atypical network or streaks. Asymmetry in two
axes is described as a criterion found in 96% of malignant melanomas, which is
consistent with our findings, even though our assessment included only thin
melanomas.24
Streaks were also found in these melanomas by Gkalpakiotis, who, upon assessing 71 thin
melanomas, found streaks in 68 cases.25 Some authors have shown that the presence of atypical irregular
network is more related to early melanomas (<1 mm).19,23 In 2001,
Stante studied 84 cases of melanomas of all thickness. The author found a correlation
between Breslow index and dermoscopic criteria, verifying that the presence of atypical
network is more associated with early melanomas, being found in 88% of melanomas
in situ.23 In our
study, this criterion is well observed when all thin melanomas are considered, but it is
interesting to note that it is less frequent in melanomas in situ when
compared to invasive melanomas less than or equal to 1 mm thick. Perhaps this tendency
could be confirmed by studying a larger sample, observing statistical significance.
Another interesting finding is the difference in the number of colors found in both
groups. It is known that all melanomas show 3 or more colors in 85% of cases and five or
more colors in 40% of cases.24 In our
study we observed that the higher the number of colors, the greater the possibility that
the lesion is invasive, with a 16-fold increased risk if 3 or more colors are found.
Although dermoscopic islands have been described as a characteristic associated with
thin melanomas arising from a nevus, in our study the presence of dermoscopic islands in
thin melanomas was less frequent. It is important to note that only approximately 25% of
melanomas arise from a pre-existing nevus.13,26
Several authors have shown that atypical vessels are rarely found in thin
melanomas.18,19,21,25 We have found atypical vessels in 31.7%
of thin melanomas. We believe that it is more difficult to assess this criterion
retrospectively, considering that most studies use contact dermoscopy to examine the
lesions, and contact can compress the vessels and lead to an impaired record during this
process.
Our study also shows that invasive melanomas present with a blue-white veil and milky
red area more often than melanomas in situ, showing statistical
significance. The blue-white veil is a structure that shows tumor nests in the dermis
associated with orthokeratosis, acanthosis and hypergranulosis, and is more commonly
associated with thick melanomas.15 The
milky red area appears due to the increased vascularity of the tumor and, although
rarely seen, it is the vascular structure with the highest predictive value for the
diagnosis of melanoma (77.8%).14
Regression structures, like peppering and white scar-like areas, are less observed in
thin melanomas, which is in agreement with our findings (less than 10% of thin melanomas
showed regression structures).18,19,23 Seidenari et al. evaluated regression structures
(blue areas and/or peppering and/or veil and/or white scar-like areas) in 255
melanocytic lesions; they observed these characteristics in benign lesions and also in
melanomas in situ and invasive melanomas.27 However, this study showed that regression is not only
more frequent and extensive in invasive melanomas than it is in in situ
lesions, but it also has a different morphological expression. While in invasive lesions
areas without blue-gray structures usually related to veil and white scar-like area -
are frequently observed, in melanoma in situ the disappearance of the
network or of dermoscopic structures in circumscribed regions of the lesion gives rise
to areas of light brown pigmentation without structures.
Important considerations about the results of this study have to be made. It is relvant
to stress that, although significant, some results showed a great confidence interval,
which is mainly related to the sample size. Furthermore, this study did not include
lesions with a Breslow index greater than 1 mm. Studies that include thicker melanomas
would be useful to assess the specificity of the characteristics of thin melanomas and
corroborate these findings. Prospective studies, evaluated by different groups of
observers, are needed to confirm the reproducibility and validity of these diagnostic
criteria.

CONCLUSION
This study showed that some dermoscopic features may be associated with Breslow index.
In general, thin melanomas mainly present asymmetry in two axes, 3 or more colors,
atypical dots or atypical globules and atypical network or streaks. Melanomas in
situ tend to have up to 2 colors, no blue-white veil and no milky red area.
Invasive melanomas tend to exhibit 3 or more colors, a milky red area, blue-white veil,
atypical network or streaks. Dermoscopic evaluation plays an important role in
diagnostic accuracy, but it can also be used to estimate preoperative thickness. Other
prospective, multicentered studies of a larger sample and that include thick melanomas
are needed to confirm these findings.
