[Abstract, Introduction, Methods, Results, Discussion]

Green Tea Catechins Reduce Invasive Potential of Human Melanoma Cells by Targeting COX-2, PGE2 Receptors and Epithelial-to-Mesenchymal Transition. Melanoma is the most serious type of skin disease and a leading cause of death from skin disease due to its highly metastatic ability. To develop more effective chemopreventive agents for the prevention of melanoma, we have determined the effect of green tea catechins on the invasive potential of human melanoma cells and the molecular mechanisms underlying these effects using A375 (BRAF-mutated) and Hs294t (Non-BRAF-mutated) melanoma cell lines as an in vitro model. Employing cell invasion assays, we found that the inhibitory effects of green tea catechins on the cell migration were in the order of (-)-epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG)>(-)-epigallocatechin>(-)-epicatechin-3-gallate>(-)-gallocatechin>(-)-epicatechin. Treatment of A375 and Hs294t cells with EGCG resulted in a dose-dependent inhibition of cell migration or invasion of these cells, which was associated with a reduction in the levels of cyclooxygenase (COX)-2, prostaglandin (PG) E2 and PGE2 receptors (EP2 and EP4). Treatment of cells with celecoxib, a COX-2 inhibitor, also inhibited melanoma cell migration. EGCG inhibits 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate-, an inducer of COX-2, and PGE2-induced cell migration of cells. EGCG decreased EP2 agonist (butaprost)- and EP4 agonist (Cay10580)-induced cell migration ability. Moreover, EGCG inhibited the activation of NF-kB/p65, an upstream regulator of COX-2, in A375 melanoma cells, and treatment of cells with caffeic acid phenethyl ester, an inhibitor of NF-kB, also inhibited cell migration. Inhibition of melanoma cell migration by EGCG was associated with transition of mesenchymal stage to epithelial stage, which resulted in an increase in the levels of epithelial biomarkers (E-cadherin, cytokeratin and desmoglein 2) and a reduction in the levels of mesenchymal biomarkers (vimentin, fibronectin and N-cadherin) in A375 melanoma cells. Together, these results indicate that EGCG, a major green tea catechin, has the ability to inhibit melanoma cell invasion/migration, an essential step of metastasis, by targeting the endogenous expression of COX-2, PGE2 receptors and epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition.

Introduction
The melanoma remains the leading cause of death from skin diseases due to its propensity to metastasis. The statistical analysis from American Cancer Society indicated that in 2008, there were 8,420 melanoma-associated deaths in the U.S. and the number of new cases of invasive melanoma was estimated at 62,480 [1]. The incidence of melanoma has increased in the past few decades in the United States and is increasing rapidly in children [1]-[3]. If recognized and treated early, melanoma is curable, but as the disease progresses its propensity to metastasize make it difficult to treat. Chronic exposure to solar ultraviolet (UV) radiation has been implicated in melanoma and non-melanoma skin cancers [4], [5]. Exposure of the skin to UV radiation induces an increase in the expression levels of cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2), a rate-limiting enzyme that catalyzes the conversion of arachidonic acid to prostaglandins (PGs). The enhanced generation of PGs, specifically PGE2, plays a central role in orchestrating the multiple events involved in cancer invasion and metastasis. PGE2 is an important metabolite which has been implicated in these risks more than other PG metabolites, and has been shown to exert its effects through G protein-coupled receptors, EP1, EP2, EP3 and EP4, and has been implicated in angiogenesis, decreased host immunity and enhanced invasion and metastasis [6], [7]. Although, melanoma is less common than other skin cancers, it causes the majority (75%) of skin cancer-related deaths. Once diagnosed with metastatic melanoma, most patients will die of their disease within 2 years [1], [8]. Since, melanoma is a highly malignant cancer with a potent capacity to metastasize distantly, an approach that reduces its metastatic ability may facilitate the development of an effective strategy for its treatment and/or prevention.
Catechins isolated from the leaves of green tea (Camellia sinensis) have a number of beneficial health effects including anti-carcinogenic activity, which has been demonstrated in various tumor models [9], [10]. In previous studies, we and others have shown that oral administration of an aqueous extract of green tea or green tea catechins, which are commonly called as polyphenols (a mixture of catechins), in drinking water inhibits UV radiation-induced non-melanoma skin cancer in mice in terms of tumor incidence, tumor multiplicity and tumor growth/size [11], [12]. Multiple mechanisms or molecular targets have been reported by which green tea polyphenols protect the skin from skin tumors. These mechanisms include the DNA repair [13], [14], stimulation of immune system [14], [15], anti-inflammatory effects [16] and anti-oxidant activity [17] of green tea polyphenols in vitro and in vivo models. However, the beneficial effects of green tea polyphenols on melanoma are not well studied and less understood. As green tea is commonly consumed as a beverage world-wide, we assessed the effect of its polyphenolic components on the invasive potential of melanoma cells using melanoma cell lines as an in vitro model. Beverage grade green tea leaves contains 5 major catechins or epicatechin derivatives: (-)-epicatechin, (-)-gallocatechin, (-)-epicatechin gallate, (-)-epigallaocatechin and (-)-epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG) [18].
In the present study, first we assessed the chemotherapeutic potential of various catechins on the migration capacity of human melanoma cells, as the migration of cancer cells is a major event in the metastatic cascade. For this purpose, two highly metastasis-specific melanoma cancer cell lines were selected: one is A375 which is BRAF mutated and activating mutations of the protooncogene BRAF have been observed in approximately 50% of malignant melanomas. Second cell line is Hs294t, which is also highly metastatic but not BRAF mutated. These two cell lines were used as an in vitro model for this study. In preliminary screening experiments, we identified that EGCG is a major active component of green tea polyphenols which significantly blocks the migration/invasion of melanoma cells compared to other catechins or epicatechin derivatives. We further characterized the role of COX-2 and its metabolite PGE2 on the migration of human melanoma cancer cells and ascertained whether EGCG has any suppressive effects on the COX-2-mediated migration of these cells. Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), the process whereby epithelial cells transform into mesenchymal cells, has recently been shown to be relevant for cancer growth and cancer metastasis. During EMT, cells lose expression of proteins that promote cell-cell contact such as E-cadherin and acquire mesenchymal markers such as vimentin, fibronectin and N-cadherin, which promote cell invasion and metastasis [19]. The EMT has also been associated with higher levels of inflammation and inflammatory mediators, and therefore we have also checked whether inhibition of COX-2 expression and PGE2 production by EGCG in melanoma cells is associated with reversal of EMT and that leads to inhibitory effect on melanoma cell migration. Here, we present evidence that EGCG inhibits the invasive potential of melanoma cells through transition of mesenchymal state to epithelial state in melanoma cells and that EGCG do so through a process that involves the reduction of COX-2 expression and lowering the levels of PGE2 and PGE2 receptors in melanoma cells.

Materials and Methods
Source of green tea catechins
Various purified tea catechins used in this study were obtained from Dr. Y. Hara of Mitsui Norin Company (Tokyo, Japan). These catechins or polyphenols are stable for at least two years when refrigerated at 4degC.
Antibodies, chemicals and reagents
Celecoxib, PGE2, 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA) and EP2 agonist were purchased from Sigma Chemical Co. (St. Louis, MO). Boyden Chambers and polycarbonate membranes (8 um pore size) for cell invasion assays were obtained from Neuroprobe, Inc. (Gaithersburg, MD). The antibodies specific to N-cadherin, keratin-18 and fibronectin were obtained from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Santa Cruz, CA), while antibodies for EP1, EP2, EP3, EP4, vimentin, E-cadherin, NF-kB, IKKa and IkBa and their secondary antibodies were purchased from Cell Signaling Technology (Beverly, MA). Desmoglein-2 was obtained from Abcam (Cambridge, MA). Antibodies specific for COX-2, EP4 agonist and an enzyme immunoassay kit for PGE2 analysis were obtained from Cayman Chemicals (Ann Arbor, MI).
Cell lines and cell culture conditions
The normal human epidermal melanocytes (HEMa-LP, Catalogue #C-024-5C) were commercially obtained from Invitrogen (Carlsbad, CA), and were cultured in HMGS-2 medium supplemented with human melanocyte growth supplement provided by the supplier. The human melanoma cells lines, A375 and Hs294t, were purchased from the American Type Culture Collection (Manassas, VA). The cell lines were cultured as monolayers in RPMI 1640 culture medium supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (Hyclone, Logan, UT), 100 ug/mL penicillin, and 100 ug/mL streptomycin and maintained in an incubator with 5% CO2 at 37degC. The EGCG was dissolved in a small amount of acetone, which was added to the complete cell culture medium [maximum concentration of acetone, 0.1% (v/v) in media] prior to addition to sub-confluent cells (60-70% confluent). Cells treated with acetone only served as a vehicle control. To determine the effect of EGCG on TPA- or PGE2-mediated effects, EGCG was added in cell culture medium at least 30 minutes before the treatment of the cells with TPA, PGE2, PGE2 receptor or PGE2 receptor agonists.
Cell invasion assay
The invasion capacity of melanoma cells was determined in vitro using Boyden Chambers (Gaithersburg, MD) in which the two chambers were separated with matrigel coated Millipore membranes (6.5 mm diameter filters, 8 uM pore size), as detailed previously [20]. Briefly, melanoma cells (1.5x104 cells/100 uL serum-reduced medium) were placed in the upper chamber of Boyden chambers, test agents were added alone, or in combination, to the upper chamber (200 uL), and the lower chamber contained the medium alone (150 uL). Chambers were assembled and kept in an incubator for 24 h. After incubation, cells from the upper surface of Millipore membranes were removed with gentle swabbing and the migrant cells on the lower surface of membranes were fixed and stained with crystal violet. Membranes were then washed with distilled water and mounted onto glass slides. The membranes were examined microscopically and cellular migration was determined by counting the number of stained cells on each membrane in at least 4-5 randomly selected fields using an Olympus BX41 microscope. Representative photomicrographs were obtained using a Qcolor5 digital camera system fitted to an Olympus BX41 microscope. Resultant data are presented as a mean of migrating cells +- SD/microscopic field of three independent experiments.
Scratch assay or wound healing assay
Scratch or wound healing assay was performed to detect melanoma cell migration, as detailed previously [20]. Briefly, melanoma cells were grown to full confluency in six-well plates and incubated overnight in starvation medium. Cell monolayers were wounded with a sterile 100 uL pipette tip, washed with starvation medium to remove detached cells from the plates. Cells were left either untreated or treated with indicated doses of tea catechins in full medium and kept in a CO2 incubator for 48 h. After 48 h, medium was replaced with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) buffer, the wound gap was observed and cells were photographed using an Olympus BX41 microscope fitted with digital camera.
Quantitation of prostaglandin E2 using PGE2 immunoassay kit
The levels of PGE2 in cell homogenates were measured using the Cayman PGE2 Enzyme Immunoassay Kit (Ann Arbor, MI) following the manufacturer's protocol. Briefly, at indicated time point, cells were harvested and homogenized in 100 mM phosphate buffer, pH 7.4 containing 1 mM ethylenediamine tetraacetic acid and 10 uM indomethacin using a homogenizer. Homogenates were centrifuged and the supernatants were collected for the analysis of PGE2 concentrations following the manufacturer's protocol.
Western blot analysis
Cell lysates were prepared to analyze the expression levels of different proteins, as described previously [21]. Briefly, following treatment of melanoma cells for the indicated time periods with or without EGCG or any other agent, the cells were harvested, washed with cold PBS and lysed with ice-cold lysis buffer supplemented with protease inhibitors. Equal amounts of proteins were resolved on 10% Tris-Glycine gels and transferred onto a nitrocellulose membrane. After blocking the non-specific binding sites, the membrane was incubated with the primary antibody at 4degC overnight. The membrane was then incubated with the appropriate peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibody and the immunoreactive bands were visualized using the enhanced chemiluminescence reagents. Equal protein loading was verified on the membrane after stripping it and re-probed with anti-b actin antibody.
Assay for NF-kB/p65 activity
Quantitative analysis of NF-kB/p65 activity was performed using the NF-kB TransAM Activity Assay Kit (Active Motif, Carlsbad, CA) following the manufacturer's protocol. Briefly, the nuclear extracts of cells were prepared using the Nuclear Extraction Kit (Active Motif, Carlsbad, CA) following the manufacturer's instructions. Absorbance was recorded at 450 nm using absorbance at 650 nm as the reference. The results are expressed as the percentage of the optical density of the non-EGCG-treated control group.
Statistical analysis
For migration assays, the control and EGCG-, TPA- PGE2- or EP2- and EP4-agonists treatment groups or combined-treatment groups separately were compared using one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by post hoc Dunn's test using GraphPad Prism version 4.00 for Windows, GraphPad Software, San Diego, California, USA, www.graphpad.com. All quantitative data for cell migration are shown as mean +- SD/microscopic field. In each case P<0.05 was considered statistically significant.

Results
Effect of green tea catechins on human melanoma cell migration/invasion
In the present study, first we have assessed and compared the effect of various green tea catechins on the invasive potential of human melanoma cells in vitro using Boyden chamber. The molecular structures of five major tea catechins, EC, GC, ECG, EGC and EGCG are shown in Figure 1A. Using in vitro cell invasion assay, we found that treatment of A375 and Hs294t cells with equimolar concentration (25 uM) of catechins for 24 h resulted in inhibition of migration/invasion of these cells. The relative inhibitory effect of catechins on melanoma cell migration or invasion was in the order of: EGCG>EGC>ECG>GC>EC, as shown in Figure 1B. The experiment was repeated three times and resultant data of cell migration from each treatment group has been summarized in Figure 1C. These results also suggest that the cell migration ability of BRAF-mutated A375 cells was higher than non-BRAF-mutated Hs294t cells; however, the difference was not statistically significant. This screening preliminary experiment revealed that EGCG has greater inhibitory effect on melanoma cell migration compared to other tea catechins; therefore, EGCG was selected for further studies of cell invasion behavior of human melanoma cells and the molecular mechanisms underlying these effects.
10.1371/journal.pone.0025224.g001
Figure 1
Comparative effects of green tea catechins on the cell invasion capacity of melanoma cells.
(A) Chemical structures of major green tea catechins. EC, (-)-epicatechin; GC, (-)-gallocatechin; ECG, (-)-epicatechin-3-gallate; EGC, (-)-epigallocatechin, and EGCG, (-)-epigallocatechin-3-gallate. (B) Effect of equimolar concentration (25 uM) of various green tea catechins on the migration of human melanoma cells (A375 and Hs294t) after treatment for 24 h. (C) The migrating cells were counted and the results expressed as the mean number of migratory cells +- SD/microscopic field. Data collected from three independent experiments. Significant inhibition by EGC and EGCG versus non-tea catechins-treated controls, PP<0.01; *P<0.001.
EGCG inhibits human melanoma cell invasion
Next, we determined dose-dependent effect of EGCG on the cell migration potential of A375 and Hs294t human melanoma cells using Boyden chamber cell migration assays. First, screening experiments were performed to determine the effects of lower concentrations of EGCG (ug/mL), which should not reduce the cell viability or induce apoptosis in these cells. As shown in Figure 2A, relative to untreated control cells, treatment of cells with EGCG at concentrations of 0, 10, 20 and 40 ug/mL reduced the invasive potential of A375 and Hs294t cells in a concentration-dependent manner. The density of the migrating cells on the membrane after staining with crystal violet is shown in Figure 2A, and the numbers of migrating cells/microscopic field are summarized in Figure 2B. The melanoma cell invasion potential was inhibited by 13% to 65% (P<0.01-0.001) in A375 cells and by 7% to 70% (P<0.001) in Hs294t cells in a concentration-dependent manner after treatment with EGCG for 24 h. The density of cell migration was higher after 48 h, and the inhibitory effect of EGCG on melanoma cells migration was also comparatively higher than 24 h (data not shown). To verify that the inhibition of cancer cell migration by EGCG was a direct effect on migration ability, and that was not due to a reduction in cell viability, a trypan blue assay was performed using cells that were treated identically to those used in the migration assays. Treatment of A375 and Hs294t cells with various concentrations of EGCG (0, 10, 20 and 40 ug/mL) for 24 h had no significant inhibitory effect on cell viability or cell death (data not shown).
10.1371/journal.pone.0025224.g002
Figure 2
EGCG inhibits melanoma cell invasion/migration.
(A) Treatment of human melanoma cells with EGCG for 24 h inhibits migration of A375 and Hs294t cells in a concentration-dependent manner. (B) The migrating cells were counted and the results expressed as the mean number of migratory cells +- SD/microscopic field. Significant inhibition by EGCG versus non-EGCG-treated controls, PP<0.01; *P<0.001. (C) Scratch or wound healing assay was performed to assess the effect of EGCG on the migration of A375 and Hs294t melanoma cells. Incubation of A375 or Hs294t cells with EGCG (10 and 20 ug/mL) for 48 h inhibits migration of cells compared to non-EGCG-treated control cells. Assay was repeated three times and representative pictures are shown. Space between dotted lines in each panel shows the space without or negligent number of migrating cells.
We have further confirmed the inhibitory effect of EGCG on melanoma cell migration by employing scratch or wound healing assay, as described in Material and Methods. As shown in Figure 2C, relative to untreated control cells, treatment of cells with EGCG (10 and 20 ug/mL) reduced the migration capacity of A375 and Hs294t cells in a concentration-dependent manner after the treatment of cells for 48 h. The part of gap or wounding space between cell layers after making a wound was occupied by the migrating Hs294t cells which were not treated with EGCG. However, the healing of the wound or the empty space of the cells was not occupied by the migrating cells treated with EGCG and this effect was dose-dependent. The gap or wounding space between the cell layers is highlighted by broken white lines, as shown in Figure 2C. Similar inhibitory effects of EGCG on cell migration using scratch assay was also found with A375 cells (Figure 2C, lower panels). These observations suggest that EGCG has the ability to inhibit the migration ability of melanoma cells.
EGCG reduces endogenous COX-2 expression in melanoma cells
To examine whether the inhibitory effect of EGCG on the migration of the melanoma cells is associated with the reduction of endogenous expression of COX-2, we determined the levels of COX-2 in cell lysates of the various treatment groups using western blot analysis. Western blot analysis revealed that the treatment of A375 and Hs294t cells with EGCG reduced the levels of COX-2 expression in a concentration-dependent manner as compared to the expression in untreated controls (Figure 3A).
10.1371/journal.pone.0025224.g003
Figure 3
EGCG inhibits invasion of melanoma cells by reducing endogenous COX-2 expression.
(A) Treatment of A375 and Hs294t cells with EGCG for 24 h resulted in down-regulation of COX-2 protein expression. (B) Treatment of A375 and Hs294t cells with celecoxib, an inhibitor of COX-2, for 24 h inhibits melanoma cell migration in a dose-dependent manner. The data are expressed as the mean number of migratory cells+- SD/microscopic field. Significant difference versus non-celecoxib-treated control cells, *P<0.001; +P<0.05. (C) Treatment of A375 cells with EGCG (20 and 40 ug/mL) inhibits TPA (a COX-2 stimulator)-enhanced cell migration capacity. The data on cell migration capacity are summarized in terms of mean number of migrating cells/microscopic field +- SD, n = 3. Significant inhibition versus TPA treatment alone, *P<0.001. (D) EGCG down regulates TPA-induced COX-2 expression in A375 cells. The levels of COX-2 were determined in cell lysates using western blot analysis.
Celecoxib, a selective COX-2 inhibitor, inhibits melanoma cell migration
This experiment was performed to verify whether the inhibitory effect of EGCG on melanoma cell migration is mediated through its inhibitory effect on COX-2 expression. For this purpose, equal numbers of A375 and Hs294t cells were subjected to the cell invasion assay after treatment with various concentrations of celecoxib (0, 5, 10, 20 uM), a well known inhibitor of COX-2, for 24 h. As shown in Figure 3B, treatment of the A375 and Hs294t cells with celecoxib resulted in a significant reduction in the cell migration capacity of melanoma cells in a concentration-dependent manner as compared with non-celecoxib-treated controls (P<0.05-0.001). These data suggested that the inhibition of COX-2 expression by the treatment of cells with EGCG is associated with the inhibition of melanoma cell migration.
EGCG inhibits TPA (an inducer of COX-2)-induced cell migration
TPA is a well known skin tumor promoter and has been shown to stimulate the expression of COX-2 in the skin cells [22]; therefore, the melanoma cells were treated with TPA for the stimulation of COX-2 expression in vitro, and thereafter determined the effect of TPA on the migration of melanoma cells. As shown in Figure 3C, treatment of A375 cells with TPA (40 ng/mL) for 24 h resulted in a significantly enhanced cell migration (P<0.001) compared to non-TPA-treated control cells. To determine whether EGCG inhibits TPA-induced cell migration in human melanoma cells, A375 cells were treated with TPA (40 ng/mL) with and without the treatment of EGCG for 24 h. The treatment of A375 cells with EGCG (20 and 40 ug/mL) resulted in a dose-dependent inhibition of TPA-induced cell migration. A summary of the cell migration data for the various treatment groups is provided in Figure 3C. Treatment of EGCG at the doses of 20 ug/mL and 40 ug/mL inhibited TPA-induced cell migration by 95% (P<0.001) and >100% (P<0.001) respectively. To verify whether this inhibition of cell migration by EGCG is mediated through the inhibition of TPA-induced COX-2 expression, cell lysates were prepared and subjected to western blot analysis to estimate the levels of COX-2 expression. Western blot analysis data revealed that treatment of A375 cells with TPA for 24 h resulted in higher expression of COX-2 as compared to the expression in cells that were not treated with TPA (Figure 3D). Pretreatment of A375 cells with EGCG (20 and 40 ug/mL) for 24 h resulted in inhibition of TPA-induced COX-2 expression (Figure 3D). These data suggest that inhibition of TPA-induced cell migration by EGCG is mediated through the downregulation of COX-2 expression.
Inhibition of melanoma cell migration by EGCG is mediated through its inhibitory effects on PGE2 production
PGE2 is one of the metabolites of COX-2, and most of the biological activities of COX-2 are mediated through its metabolites, therefore, we examined whether treatment of melanoma cells with EGCG reduced the levels of PGE2 production. For this purpose, Hs294t melanoma cells were treated with EGCG for 24 h. Cells were harvested and the levels of PGE2 were determined using PGE2 immunoassay kit. As shown in Figure 4A, treatment of cells with EGCG resulted in a dose-dependent reduction in the levels of PGE2 in these cells. Next, we examined the effect of PGE2 on the Hs294t cell migration using in vitro cell invasion assay. Cell invasion data revealed that treatment of PGE2 significantly enhanced (P<0.01, P<0.001) the cell migration potential in a dose-dependent manner (Figure 4B). Further, the effect of EGCG on PGE2-induced cell migration was evaluated. For this purpose, Hs294t cells were treated with PGE2 (10 uM) with and without the treatment with EGCG for 24 h and cell migration determined. We found that the treatment of melanoma cells with PGE2 resulted in a significant increase of cell migration (P<0.05) compared to the cells which were not treated with PGE2 (Figure 4C and 4D). Treatment of Hs294t cells with EGCG (20 or 40 ug/mL) for 24 h resulted in a dose-dependent inhibition of PGE2 (10 uM)-induced melanoma cell migration, as shown in Figure 4C and data are summarized in Figure 4D. Similar inhibitory effect of EGCG was observed on PGE2-induced cell migration in A375 melanoma cells (data not shown).
10.1371/journal.pone.0025224.g004
Figure 4
EGCG inhibits PGE2-induced melanoma cell migration.
(A) Dose-dependent effect of EGCG on the levels of PGE2 in melanoma Hs294t cells. The levels of PGE2 are expressed in terms of pg/mg protein+- SD, n = 3 independent experiments. Significant inhibition by EGCG versus non-EGCG-treated controls, *P<0.001. (B) Treatment of Hs294t cells with PGE2 enhances cell migration in a concentration-dependent manner. Significant difference versus control, PP<0.05, *P<0.001. (C) Treatment of cells with EGCG (20 and 40 ug/mL) inhibits PGE2-enhanced cell migration capacity of Hs294t cells. Representative photomicrographs of cell migration were presented from three independent experiments. (D) The data on cell migration are summarized as a mean number of migratory cells +- SD/microscopic field. Significant inhibition versus PGE2 alone: *P<0.001. Cell invasion assays under each experiment were repeated three times and in each case the migrating cells were counted and the results are expressed as a mean number of migratory cells +-SD/microscopic field.
EGCG decreases the levels of PGE2 receptors in melanoma cells
COX-2 metabolite PGE2 has been shown to manifest its biological activity via four known G-protein-coupled receptors (i.e., EP1-EP4) [7], [23]. Therefore, we determined the effect of EGCG on the basal levels of PGE2 receptors in melanoma cells. Western blot analysis revealed that treatment of A375 cells with EGCG (0, 10, 20 and 40 ug/mL) for 24 h resulted in a dose-dependent reduction in the levels of EP2 and EP4 (Figure 5A). The inhibitory effect of EGCG was also observed on EP1 and EP3 but was less prominent than the effect on EP2 and EP4 (data not shown).
10.1371/journal.pone.0025224.g005
Figure 5
EGCG inhibits PGE2 receptors-induced human melanoma cell migration.
(A) Treatment of A375 melanoma cells with EGCG for 24 h decreases the expression levels of PGE2 receptors EP2 and EP4 in a concentration-dependent manner. The cells were harvested 24 h after the treatment and cell lysates were prepared and subjected to western blot analysis, as detailed in Materials and Methods. (B) Treatment of A375 cells with EP2 agonist (butaprost) for 24 h enhances melanoma cell migration (left panels). The data on cell migration are summarized and expressed as a mean number of migratory cells +- SD/microscopic field, n = 3 (right panel). (C) Treatment of A375 cells with EGCG inhibits EP2 agonist (1.0 uM)-induced melanoma cell migration (left panels). The data on cell migration are summarized as a mean number of migratory cells +- SD/microscopic field, n = 3 (right panel). (D) Treatment of A375 cells with EP4 agonist (Cay10580) for 24 h enhances cell migration (left panels). The data on cell migration in each group are expressed as a mean number of migratory cells +- SD/microscopic field, n = 3 (right panel). (E) Treatment of A375 cells with EGCG inhibits EP4 agonist (1.0 uM)-induced cell migration (left panels). The data on cell migration are summarized as a mean number of migratory cells +- SD/microscopic field, n = 3 (right panel). Representative photomicrographs of cell migration were presented from three independent experiments in each case. Significant inhibition versus non-EGCG-treated controls, PP<0.01; *P<0.001; Significant increase versus non-EP2 agonist-treated or non-EP4 agonist-treated controls, +P<0.001.
An EP2 agonist and EP4 agonist promote the migration of melanoma cells while EGCG inhibits EP2 and EP4 agonists-stimulated cell migration
To determine whether PGE2 receptor EP2 and EP4 has a role in melanoma cell migration, and whether EGCG inhibits their effects on cell migration, we further conducted cell invasion experiments with A375 melanoma cells. In vitro cell invasion experiments revealed that treatment of A375 cells with EP2 agonist (butaprost) significantly enhanced the migration ability of melanoma cells, as shown in Figure 5B. A summary of number of migrating cells/microscopic field is also shown (Figure 5B, right panel). Pretreatment of A375 cells with EGCG inhibits EP2 agonist (1 uM)-induced melanoma cell migration by 36% and 58% (P<0.001) at the dose of 20 and 40 ug/mL, respectively (Figure 5C right panel). Similarly, the effect of EP4 agonist was determined on the migration of A375 melanoma cells. As shown in Figure 5D, EP4 agonist treatment of A375 cells for 24 h significantly enhanced (P<0.001) the cell migration in a dose-dependent manner. Treatment of cells with EGCG (20 and 40 ug/mL) significantly inhibited (41-66%, P<0.01 and P<0.001) EP4 agonist-induced cell migration (Figure 5E, left and right panels). These data suggest that the expressions of PGE2 receptors in melanoma cells have roles in cell migration, and that EGCG inhibits the migration of melanoma cells, at least in part, by decreasing the levels of PGE2 receptors.
EGCG decreases the nuclear level and activity of NF-kB/p65 in melanoma cells: NF-kB acts as a mediator of melanoma cell invasion
NF-kB is an upstream regulator of COX-2, therefore we assessed whether EGCG also affects the levels and activation of NF-kB in melanoma cells. To examine this effect, A375 cells were treated with various concentrations of EGCG (0, 10, 20 and 40 ug/mL) for 24 h, and thereafter cells were harvested and cell lysates prepared for western blot analysis. Western blot analysis revealed that treatment of cells with EGCG decreased the translocation of NF-kB/p65 in to the nucleus in a dose-dependent manner (Figure 6A). The activity of NF-kB also was significantly reduced (20-65%, P<0.001) after the treatment of cells with EGCG in a concentration-dependent manner (Figure 6B). The results also indicated that treatment of EGCG resulted in the downregulation of IKKa and degradation of IkBa (Figure 6A), which leads to the inactivation of NF-kB and its translocation to the nucleus. Further, to assess whether NF-kB has a role in melanoma cell migration, A375 melanoma cells were treated with caffeic acid phenethyl ester (0, 5.0 and 10.0 ug/mL), a potent inhibitor of NF-kB, and cell migration was studied. As shown in Figures 6C and 6D, treatment of A375 cells with caffeic acid phenethyl ester resulted in a significant reduction of cell migration (26% and 57%; P<0.05, and P<0.001) compared to non-cafeic acid phenethyl ester-treated control cells, and these results are similar to that observed on treatment of the cells with EGCG (Figure 2).
10.1371/journal.pone.0025224.g006
Figure 6
Effect of EGCG on NF-kB activation in melanoma cells.
(A) Treatment of A375 cells with EGCG decreases the basal level of NF-kB/p65 and IKKa while inhibiting the degradation of IkBa. After 24 h treatment with various concentrations of EGCG the cells were harvested and cytosolic and nuclear fractions were prepared and subjected to the analysis of NF-kB, IKKa and IkBa using western blot analysis. Representative blot is shown from three independent experiments with identical observations. (B) The activity of NF-kB/p65 in the nuclear fraction of the cells after treatment with and without EGCG for 24 h was measured using NF-kB/p65-specific activity assay kit, n = 3. Activity of NF-kB is expressed in terms of percent of control (non-EGCG-treated) group. Significant decrease versus control: *P<0.001. (C) Treatment of A375 cells with caffeic acid phenethyl ester (CAPE), an inhibitor of NF-kB, inhibits melanoma cell migration. Representative photomicrographs are shown from three separate experiments. (D) Data on cell migration capacity are summarized as the mean number of migratory cells +- SD/microscopic field, n = 3. Significant inhibition versus non-CAPE-treated cells: PP<0.05; *P<0.001.
EGCG reverses epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition in melanoma cells
Activation of NF-kB has been implicated in inflammation-induced tumor growth and progression, and has been identified as an important regulator of EMT in several cancer cell types [24]-[27]. As the inhibition of melanoma cell migration by EGCG is associated with the inactivation of NF-kB, we sought to examine whether EGCG targets EMT biomarkers or whether EGCG transforms mesenchymal biomarkers to epithelial biomarkers in melanoma cells and that is responsible for its inhibitory effect on cell migration. To examine this effect, A375 cells were treated with EGCG for 24 h, and cell lysates were prepared for the analyses of various epithelial and mesenchymal biomarkers using western blot analysis. As shown in Figure 7, western blot analyses revealed that EGCG increased the levels of the epithelial biomarkers, such as E-cadherin, keratin-18 and desmoglein 2 dose-dependently in melanoma cells compared to untreated controls. In contrast, the levels of mesenchymal biomarkers, such as vimentin, fibronectin and N-cadherin were reduced in melanoma cells after treatment with EGCG in a dose-dependent manner.
10.1371/journal.pone.0025224.g007
Figure 7
Treatment of melanoma cells with EGCG results in mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition.
Treatment of A375 cells with EGCG for 24 h enhances the levels of epithelial biomarkers in the cells, such as, the levels of E-cadherin, keratin-18 and desmoglein 2. Simultaneously the levels of mesenchymal biomarkers in melanoma cells, such as, vimentin, fibronectin and N-cadherin were decreased dose-dependently. Western blot analysis was performed as detailed under Materials and Methods. Representative blots are shown from three independent experiments with similar results.

Discussion
Melanoma remains the leading cause of death from skin disease, in large part, due to its propensity to metastasize. Although melanoma is less common than non-melanoma skin cancers, which includes squamous cell and basal cell carcinoma, however, it causes approximately 75% skin cancer-related deaths. World Health Organization report indicated 48,000 melanoma-related deaths worldwide per year [28]. Most patients suffering from malignant melanoma ultimately die of their disease within two years [29], [30]. The development of new treatment options and novel strategies are required which can prevent the invasiveness of melanoma cells and that can inhibit the metastatic ability of melanoma cells. Majority of cancers over-express COX-2, an enzyme responsible for the biosynthesis of PGs metabolites. Enhanced production of PGs, and particularly PGE2, has been linked with tumor progression, invasion and metastasis [5], [7]. Because of its important role in tumor invasion and metastasis, COX-2 is considered as a promising target for cancer therapy [7], [31]. Therefore, the search of novel and non-toxic inhibitors of COX-2 as well as the inhibitors of PGE2 may provide a better option for the treatment of malignant melanoma and that may prove a better strategy for its prevention or treatment.
Green tea polyphenols/catechins have been shown to have anti-carcinogenic activities in various tumor models, including skin cancers [4], [10], [14]. In the present study, we have found that EGCG has significantly greater anti-invasive activity in melanoma cells compared to EC, GC, ECG and EGC. The significant findings of the present study are that the treatment of melanoma cells with EGCG for 24 h inhibits cell migration in a dose-dependent manner, and that is associated with the inhibition of COX-2 expression and PGE2 production. Based on our experimental observations, cells will go under apoptosis or cell death if melanoma cells are treated with higher concentrations of EGCG or for more than 24 h. Under these conditions, cell migration will decrease, and this reduction in cell migration could be due to cell death and not due to changes in migrating behavior of cells. In this study, cell death or apoptosis is not a reason of EGCG-caused inhibition of melanoma cell migration. The melanoma cells over-express COX-2, and the reduction in the levels of COX-2 by EGCG may be responsible for the inhibition of cell migration of melanoma cells. This notion is supported by the evidence that treatment of the melanoma cells with a potent COX-2 inhibitor (celecoxib) resulted in a reduction of cell migration. Studies have shown that TPA promotes COX-2 expression and subsequently enhances cell migration [32], and we have found that TPA-induced cell migration was blocked by the treatment of cells with EGCG. These observations further suggest that inhibition of melanoma cell migration by EGCG is mediated through the inhibition of COX-2 expression. PGE2 exerts its biologic functions through four G protein-coupled receptors, EP1, EP2, EP3 and EP4 [7], [23], [33], that can stimulate cell survival signals as well as invasive potential of cancer cells [34]-[36]. PGE2 has been shown to promote lung cancer and melanoma cell migration, and that this effect of PGE2 is associated with the activation of PGE2 receptors [32], [37]. Based on these investigations, we determined the involvement of the PGE2 receptors in EGCG-mediated inhibition of melanoma cell migration. It was found that the levels of EP2 and EP4 were decreased when melanoma cells were treated with EGCG. These data suggest that inhibition of the EP2 and EP4 levels by EGCG may contribute to the inhibition of melanoma cell migration. The inhibitory effect of EGCG on melanoma cell migration through the inhibitory effect on EP2 or EP4 was further verified by treating the cells with an EP2 agonist (butaprost) and an EP4 agonist (cay10580) with and without the treatment of cells with EGCG. Our data revealed that the treatment of A375 cells with the EP2 agonist and EP4 agonist resulted in enhanced cell migration, and that EP2 agonist- and EP4 agonist-induced cell migration was significantly inhibited by the treatment of cells with EGCG using identical in vitro conditions. These observations support the evidence that inhibition of PGE2 receptors by green tea catechin EGCG may have contributed to the blocking of melanoma cell migration. These findings also demonstrate the feasibility of using EGCG as an alternative to COX-2 inhibitors, which show toxicity in some patients, given the fact that COX-2 remains an attractive target for cancer therapy. As EGCG acts by decreasing the expression of both COX-2 and EP receptors, this could be more effective because EGCG targets both ligand (PGE2) and receptor (EP). EGCG has also been shown to inhibit mammary cancer cell migration through the inhibition of nitric oxide and nitric oxide-mediated mechanisms [38]. Other phytochemicals also have been assessed for their inhibitory effect on cancer cell invasion and migration. Punathil and Katiyar [39] have reported that treatment of non-small cell lung cancer cells with proanthocyanidins from grape seeds resulted in inhibition of cell migration following the inhibition of nitric oxide and guanylate cyclase pathways.
As NF-kB is an upstream regulator of COX-2, we further checked the effect of EGCG on the levels of NF-kB/p65 in melanoma cells using western blot analysis. EGCG inhibits the activation of NF-kB/p65 in a dose-dependent manner. Caffeic acid phenethyl ester, an inhibitor of NF-kB, inhibits melanoma cell migration. These observations further support the hypothesis that the inhibitory effect of EGCG on melanoma cell migration is mediated, at least in part, through the downregulation of COX-2, PGE2 and PGE2 receptors. However, it remains to be examined whether down-regulation of other NF-kB target genes also contribute to the inhibition of invasive potential of melanoma cells. NF-kB regulates a wide spectrum of biological processes, including inflammation, cell proliferation and apoptosis. Additionally, NF-kB has a role in tissue invasion, cancer cell migration and metastasis. Importantly, NF-kB has been identified as an important regulator of EMT in several cancer cell types [24]-[27]. EMT has been shown to play a major role in invasion and metastasis of epithelial tumors. EMT can render tumor cells migratory and invasive following its effect on all stages, which includes invasion, intravasation and extravasation [19]. During EMT, cells can change from an epithelial to a mesenchymal state. They lose their characteristic epithelial traits and instead acquire properties of mesenchymal cells. This process is primarily coordinated by the disappearance or loss of epithelial biomarkers such as E-cadherin and certain cytokeratins with the concomitant appearance of mesenchymal markers such as vimentin, fibronection and N-cadherin, etc. In the present study, we found that treatment of melanoma cells with EGCG resulted in suppression of mesenchymal biomarkers, such as vimentin, fibronectin and N-cadherin while restored the levels of epithelial biomarkers such as, E-cadherin, keratin and desmoglein 2, in melanoma cells which suggest that EGCG has the ability to transform mesenchymal characteristics to epithelial characteristics in melanoma cancer cells and this transition may also be one of the possible mechanisms through which EGCG reduce the invasiveness of melanoma cells and that lead to inhibition of migration of melanoma cells in our system.
Together, the results from this study have identified for the first time that EGCG, a major component of green tea catechins or polyphenols, inhibit the invasive potential of melanoma cells and that involves: (i) the inhibitory effect of EGCG on endogenous COX-2 expression and successive down-regulation of PGE2 and PGE2 receptors, (ii) the inhibitory effect of EGCG on the activation of NF-kB/p65, which is the upstream regulator of COX-2, and (iii) the mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition. Further mechanism-based in vivo studies are required which can establish the importance of EGCG and its development as a pharmacologically safe non-toxic agent for the treatment of malignant melanoma by using either alone or in combination with other phytochemicals or anti-metastatic drugs.
