[Abstract, Introduction, Methods, Results, Discussion, Discussion]

A melanoma risk score in a Brazilian population *. BACKGROUND: Important risk factors for cutaneous melanoma (CM) are recognized, but standardized scores for individual assessment must still be developed.    OBJECTIVES: The objective of this study was to develop a risk score of CM for a Brazilian sample.    METHODS: To verify the estimates of the main risk factors for melanoma, derived from a meta-analysis (Italian-based study), and externally validate them in a population in southern Brazil by means of a case-control study. A total of 117 individuals were evaluated. Different models were constructed combining the summary coefficients of different risk factors, derived from the meta-analysis, multiplied by the corresponding category of each variable for each participant according to a mathematical expression.    RESULTS: the variable that best predicted the risk of CM in the studied population was hair color (AUC: 0.71; 95% CI: 0.62-0.79). Other important factors were freckles, sunburn episodes, and skin and eye color. Consideration of other variables such as common nevi, elastosis, family history, and premalignant lesions did not improve the predictive ability of the models.    CONCLUSION: The discriminating capacity of the proposed model proved to be superior or comparable to that of previous risk models proposed for CM.

INTRODUCTION
The incidence of cutaneous melanoma (CM) has increased over the last decades among
Caucasians. CM is, in fact, the malignancy with the highest increase rates among this
population, with the exception of lung cancer in women.1,2 In 2012 in Brazil, 3,170 new cases of CM were estimated for men, and 3,060 new
cases for women, a total of 6,230 new cases. The highest estimated incidence rates of CM
are in the Southern Region of the country (5.67/100,000 inhabitants for males and
5.60/100,000 for females).3
Although the incidence of CM is increasing, the disease remains a relatively rare
malignancy.4 Therefore, prevention campaigns targeting the general population may have little
benefit. However, concern with primary and secondary prevention is important, since CM
is a disease with high mortality rates, and early detection may change its outcome. The
prognosis of this type of cancer may be good when it is detected in its early stages.
Over the last years, patients with CM have shown better survival rates, mostly due to
early diagnosis.4-9 In developed countries, the mean estimated 5-year survival rate is 73%, while in
developing countries it is 56%. The estimated mean world rate is 69%.3
Some risk factors for CM are well recognized. They are family history of melanoma (first
degree relatives), dysplastic nevus syndrome, eye and hair color, skin color, phototype
and tanning capacity, presence of freckles and/or pre-cancerous lesions (actinic
keratoses), large number of common acquired nevi, presence of atypical nevi, and sun
exposure and other environmental factors.10-17 Although sun exposure is considered the main environmental risk factor for CM,
the relation between sun exposure and melanoma is complex.18 Some CMs seem to be strongly associated with sunlight and, potentially, sunlamps
and tanning beds.14 Sunburn episodes in childhood are most strongly associated with CM.12 Other potential risk factors are diet and occupation, as well as environmental
pollution and pesticides.13,15,16,17 However, these last two have not yet been extensively studied.
Considering constitutional risk factors, it has been reported that individuals with
light-brown, blonde or red hair present at least a two-fold risk of developing CM when
compared to individuals with dark-brown or black hair.19-24 Individuals with blue, gray or green eyes also show a high risk of developing
CM. However, this association is not as strong as that with hair color.19,20,23 Fair skin, lack of tanning capacity (phototypes I and II), and presence of
multiple freckles (especially in adults) have also been considered factors associated
with an increased risk for CM.19,21,23,25-27 The most important factor associated with the development of melanomas in
individuals with fair skin may be related to their incapacity to protect against the
damage caused by UV radiation because they have less melanin, which is effective against
the harmful effects of oxygen radicals generated by the sun.28 UVB susceptibility is significantly higher in individuals with a family history
of skin cancer and those of Northern European ancestry.29
In addition to phenotypic traits, it has been suggested that the presence of large
numbers of common acquired nevi and the presence of atypical nevi identify subjects at a
higher risk for CM. It has been shown that adults with 25 common acquired nevi or more
(>=2 mm) are twice as likely to develop melanoma than subjects with fewer than 25
nevi. People with one or more dysplastic nevi (>=5 mm) are twice as likely to develop
the disease than people with none.20,30,31 Nevi on unusual sites (dorsum of the feet, buttocks and anterior scalp) are risk
factors of melanoma and remained significant after adjustment for atypical nevi.20,31 Family history of melanoma and dysplastic nevi also appear as risk factors of
CM.32
The role of sunscreens has not been clearly defined yet. According to the same authors,
their use is associated with a two-fold increase in the risk of CM.21,22,23,33 This may be explained by the fact that individuals extend their sun exposure
and/or substitute protective clothing with sunscreens. A recent study suggests that
sunscreen use leads to longer sun exposure when it is intentional, but not when it is
unintentional.34
In contrast to previous studies, the publication of a randomized clinical trial by Green
et al conducted in Australia between 1996-2006. showed that CM can be prevented with the
regular use of an SPF 16 sunscreen.35
Although several studies have examined numerous potential risk factors for CM, few
studies have investigated the relationship between these factors and individual melanoma
risk.36,37
The great variability in CM incidence seen in different countries suggests that a large
sample size is required for developing a model in which the predictive ability is stable
across countries. Therefore, metaanalysis studies, which combine risk estimates from
many studies and appreciate differences due to genetic, geographic and climatic
conditions, allow the development of a risk score to identify subjects at a high risk of
CM.10-12
The aim of this study was to develop a melanoma risk score using the estimates of the
main risk factors for melanoma, which were derived from a meta-analysis, and externally
validate it in a Brazilian population.

METHODS
This study was part of an Italian project for the primary and secondary prevention of CM
coordinated by Istituto dell'Immacolata (IDI-IRCCS) of Rome, Italy. Since a large sample
is required to develop a risk model in which the predictive ability is stable, the
results of three meta-analyses, which combined risk estimates from many studies, were
used to develop a risk score for CM. A systematic meta-analysis of observational studies
of CM (comprising 110 independent published studies, from 1966 to 2002, of pigmented
lesions, and from 1984 to 1999 of other risk factors) was carried out at IDI-IRCCS to
identify the main risk factors for CM.10-12 Summary coefficients of the major risk factors were derived from the
metaanalysis (Table 1). The main risk factors
for CM studied by means of meta-analysis were exposure to ultraviolet radiation, sunburn
episodes, actinic damage, family history of melanoma, phenotype characteristics,
pigmented lesions, and skin phototype. All these risk factors were considered for the
construction of the risk model for CM.
The predictive ability of the various models was tested in a case-control study using
blinded data (the status case/control of subjects was unknown). This case-control study
of CM was conducted at the Department of Dermatology of the University Hospital of the
Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul (Hospital de Clinicas de Porto Alegre) and in
the dermatological outpatient clinic of the Secretary of Health of Rio Grande do Sul,
Brazil. Cases and controls were residents in the urban area of Porto Alegre and enrolled
between 2005 and 2008. The ethical committee of Hospital de Clinicas de Porto Alegr e
approved the study, and a written consent was obtained from all participants. A total of
119 subjects (53 cases and 66 controls) were invited to participate and 117 gave their
written consent. Cases were individuals with a new histologically-confirmed diagnosis of
primary malignant CM.
Controls were selected from patients in the same hospital during the same study period.
They were from the General Surgery, Vascular Surgery, Orthopedics, Otorhinolaryngology,
and General Medicine wards. Controls were from the same geographical area and did not
have a personal history of skin cancer. Controls were matched to cases by sex and age.
After signing a written consent, patients and controls orally answered an extensive and
detailed questionnaire that covered family history, life habits (dietary habits, leisure
time), occupation, use of drugs, oral contraceptives and hormones, smoking, sunlight and
UV lamp exposure, use of sunscreens, contact with radiation, pesticides (agricultural
and domestic), and other factors that could be related to CM. Age, gender, skin, hair
and eye color, and phototype were also registered.
After answering the questionnaire, patients were submitted to a full-body skin
examination, except for the scalp and genitalia, in order to detect and count
congenital, acquired and dysplastic nevi, freckles, and signs of photodamage.37
Statistical Analysis
Different models were constructed combining the summary coefficients of different
risk factors (b i), derived from the meta-analysis, and multiplied by the corresponding
category of each variable for each participant (X i) according to the following mathematical expression: e
bi+Xi+b2+x2+..ba+Xa. For instance, a subject with blonde hair, light eyes and fair skin, with
freckles and reported sunburn episodes, will have a score of 26 =e
0.50+0.48+0.72+0.84+0.73; a subject with dark brown hair and eyes, fair skin, no freckles and no
reported sunburn episodes will have a score of 2 =e 0.72. A practical predictor of subjects at high risk of developing CM was
devised and can be provided for use in clinical practice.
Factors from the physical examination considered for model construction, were skin,
eye and hair color, presence of freckles, presence of elastosis and atypical nevi,
and the number of nevi, whereas factors from the questionnaire were family history of
CM, sun exposure, and sunburn episodes throughout life. Pooled risk estimates and
coefficients derived from the meta-analysis are summarized in table 1.
To select variables for inclusion in our risk model, we assessed a variety of
factors. The variables included in the models were categorized as following: number
of common nevi over the entire body (6 categories); presence of freckles in childhood
(yes/no); skin color (2 categories); eye color (2 categories); hair color (4
categories); skin phototype (4 categories), presence of elastosis (yes/no), number of
atypical nevi, family history of CM (yes/no); sunburn epidoses in childhood (yes/no);
sunburn episodes in adulthood (yes/no); sunburn episodes throughout life (yes/no) and
total sun exposure (2 categories). Regression models were constructed using the 14
variables; the Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve in this study was used
to assess the predictive ability of each risk model. Regression models are often
evaluated by establishing a cut-off point (e.g. AUC=0.51); predictive probabilities
below the cut-off point are treated as predictors of no event, and probabilities at
or above the cut-off point are considered to be predictors of the event. A forward
approach was used for fitting variables in the models starting from a single
variable. We started the models with hair color (AUC: 0.71; 95%CI: 0.62-0.79) because
it was the highest AUC among the one-variable models. Next, we compared the
predictive ability (area under the ROC curves) of hair color alone with that of other
models with more variables. The variables that did not contribute to a better fitting
of the models were excluded. A total of 105 models were built and tested. The best
fitting model included five variables (model A). They were hair color, skin color,
eye color, sunburn episodes throughout life, and the presence of freckles. To test
the difference in AUC of different models, we used the test for equality, a
non-parametric method based on Mann-Whitney U-statistics which takes into
consideration the correlated nature of the data.38,39
All analyses were done using the statistical software package PC-STATA (Stata 9.0;
StataCorp LP, College Station, Texas 77845 USA).

RESULTS
The mean age of the study population was 57 years (56.4% female; 43.6% male). Phototype
II (44.4%), dark eyes (56.4%) and dark hair (50.4%) were most frequently observed; most
patients did not have freckles (69.0%) or atypical nevi (88.9%); 48.7% presented less
than 15 common melanocytic nevi. Table 2 shows
the characteristics of the population used for construction of the risk models.
Using the-step-forward technique to construct the models, we observed that the variable
that best predicted the risk of CM in the studied population was hair color (AUC: 0.71;
95%CI: 0.62-0.79). We observed that by adding freckles to the first model (hair color
alone) the predictive value of the model increased to 78% (AUC: 0.78; 95%CI: 95%CI:
0.690.85). After including sunburn episodes, the predictive value increased to 82% (AUC:
0.82; 95%CI: 95%CI: 0.73-0.89). After including skin and eye color to the later model,
the predictive ability increased to 85% (model A,Table
3). Adding other variables such as common nevi, elastosis, family history and
premalignant lesions did not improve the predictive ability of the models (Table 3). No statistical difference was found
between model A, which included five-variables, and the other risk models with
six-variables, except for model E (model A plus elastosis), which was inferior to model
A (P=0.001) (Table 3).
The candidate AUC (the one with the highest predictive ability) was 0.85 (95%CI:
0.77-0.91) (Table 3). Sensitivity and
specificity were calculated for various cut-off points. The optimal cut-off point with
comparable specificity was 3 and more. At the cut-off point of three and more,
sensitivity and specificity were 81% and 67%, respectively. The median risk scores for
cases and controls in the study were 9.3 and 2.1, respectively.
Table 4 shows the characteristics of the study
population classified as "high risk" by the best model. Subjects considered at "high
risk" for CM tended to have light hair and fair skin, freckles in childhood, presence of
premalignant skin lesions, and sunburn episodes in childhood.

DISCUSSION
Melanoma has many features that make it a good target for early detection. It has become
increasingly common and can be cured in its early stages with simple inexpensive
surgery. Routine screening of the general population for CM using complete skin exams is
theoretically possible, but it would be very costly because of the large number of
examinations required. Moreover, it would be inefficient because of the many
examinations with negative results. Targeting high-risk subjects would improve
efficiency and help select the appropriate individuals for interventions. Interventions
in high-risk individuals may lead to the detection of early-stage curable disease or to
a decrease in the risk of developing CM.
Our five-variable model had a discriminatory ability of 85% of CM cases. Four individual
risk factors (skin color; hair and eye color, and freckles) and reported sunburn
episodes in childhood were the variables included in the model because they required the
provider to have specialized diagnostic skills, to ask detailed questions or conduct
more extensive patient examinations. Model A was chosen as the candidate model because
it included variables that were simple and quickly, easily and accurately identified
during routine healthcare evaluations and had a good discriminatory ability. Model B,
which was as good as model A, included number of nevi.
In very high-risk individuals (e.g. members of hereditary melanoma kindreds with
dysplastic nevi) screening and interventions have resulted in earlier diagnosis and
reduced mortality.40-42 However, familial melanoma only represents 10% of all melanomas.40-42 Therefore, there is still much to be done regarding sporadic CM prevention.
Routine screening for CM has considerable implications in terms of health care costs and
unwanted effects on people. However, if individuals at high risk could be identified,
surveillance could target only this group. These interventions could include complete
skin examination, counseling and education to avoid sun exposure, regular
self-examination, and professional surveillance.
The discriminatory ability of our model was higher than that of previously proposed risk
models for CM (0.62) and comparable to the melanoma risk model proposed by Fears et al.
(0.70-0.80) and to other risk models for other cancer sites (0.57-0.72).36,37,43-45
Although the absence of several known CM risk factors may be seen as a potential
limitation of our model, this is likely of little impact, as many of the excluded
factors are highly correlated with those included in the model. Another limitation of
the model is that it was validated in a retrospective study, and the best design to
answer prognostic questions is a cohort study. However, prognostic models obtained from
only one cohort study may have restricted generalizability.46 It has been suggested that for prediction models that need a long follow-up for
gathering of enough outcome events (e.g. melanoma) retrospective data can be used.47 Another limitation of the model is that it was validated in a small case-control
study. Nonetheless, it has been suggested that, for each candidate predictor studied, 10
events are required.47 We believe that the potential usefulness of the model will encourage its testing
by other investigators in larger samples in Brazil.
The model has a number of strengths. As a predictive model with potential value in
general practice, it uses readily obtainable variables. It is flexible and can be easily
used in general practice for counseling and education to avoid sun exposure and to
encourage regular self-examination and professional surveillance. Interventions in
high-risk individuals may lead to the detection of early-stage curable disease or
decrease the risk of developing CM.

CONCLUSION
Our study suggests that subjects at high risk for developing CM could be identified with
an inexpensive and simple tool that can be used by primary healthcare providers with
minimal training, especially in countries not yet prepared to face the higher frequency
of CM.
