[Abstract, Introduction, Methods, Results, Discussion, Mixed]

Overexpressed PKC? Downregulates the Expression of PKC? in B16F10 Melanoma: Induction of Apoptosis by PKC? via Ceramide Generation. In the present study, we observed a marked variation in the expression of PKCa and PKCd isotypes in B16F10 melanoma tumor cells compared to the normal melanocytes. Interestingly, the tumor instructed expression or genetically manipulated overexpression of PKCa isotype resulted in enhanced G1 to S transition. This in turn promoted cellular proliferation by activating PLD1 expression and subsequent AKT phosphorylation, which eventually resulted in suppressed ceramide generation and apoptosis. On the other hand, B16F10 melanoma tumors preferentially blocked the expression of PKCd isotype, which otherwise could exhibit antagonistic effects on PKCa-PLD1-AKT signaling and rendered B16F10 cells more sensitive to apoptosis via generating ceramide and subsequently triggering caspase pathway. Hence our data suggested a reciprocal PKC signaling operational in B16F10 melanoma cells, which regulates ceramide generation and provide important clues to target melanoma cancer by manipulating the PKCd-ceramide axis.

Introduction
Protein kinase C (PKC) isotypes represent key components of signal transduction pathways, which regulate the proliferation, survival, or apoptosis of various cell types [1]-[3]. PKC isotypes have been grouped into three families: classical (a, bI, bII and g), novel (d, e, th and e), and atypical (z and l/i) [4], [5]. Due to their profound effect on the regulation of cell survival pathways, PKC isotypes have become the target of various intracellular pathogens [6]-[8] as well as different types of cancers [9], [10]. Interestingly, changes in the expression of PKC isotypes have been reported in numerous cancers including prostate, breast and brain [11]-[13]. In some instances, a correlation between elevated PKC and more aggressive cancers has been reported [14], [15]. Intriguingly, it has been observed that PKC isotypes that mediate proliferative responses in some cancers could behave as growth inhibitory in others [16], [17]. Along with PKC, Phospholipase D1 (PLD1), the enzyme that hydrolyzes phosphatidylcholine to phosphatidic acid, has been implicated in the regulation of various malignant and non-malignant cell proliferations [18], [19]. Interestingly, some PKC isotypes utilize PLD1 to activate the AKT for providing survival signals to the cells [20]. On the other hand, ceramide a key molecule for the regulation of apoptosis inhibits the PLD1/AKT activity thus inducing the apoptotic cascade [21]-[23]. As a result, a marked upregulation of PLD1/AKT activation along with a concomitant downregulation of ceramide generation is observed in different types of cancers.
Therefore, it seems that cancer cells ingeniously deregulate the ceramide generation pathway, which could otherwise help host cells to fight against this dreaded disease [24], [25]. Interestingly, ceramide is produced in the cell via two distinct pathways- de novo pathway and the salvage pathway depending on various stimuli [26], [27]. Interestingly, the salvage pathway of ceramide generation, which requires sphingomyelinase activity for the conversion of sphingomyelin to ceramide, is recognized as one of the key pathway for the regulation of apoptosis [28], [29]. Moreover, some PKC isotypes are specifically involved in the regulation of this salvage pathway of ceramide generation via activation of sphingomyelinases [30], [31].
In this study, we have sequentially define the inter-connective PKC-PLD1-AKT cascade that B16F10 melanoma cells exploit to subvert the customary apoptosis pathway and to ensure cell survival as a function of differential regulation of PKCa and d isotypes. Additionally, we have deciphered how a specific PKC isotype may be utilized for enhancing the ceramide generation by combating PLD1/AKT activation to induce apoptotic cascade in the B16F10 melanoma cells.

Materials and Methods
Reagents and Chemicals
DMEM medium, penicillin, streptomycin, collagenase, PMA, Fumonisin B-1 (FB-1), Imipramine and TRI Reagent were purchased from Sigma (St Louis, MO). Fetal calf serum was purchased from Gibco BRL (Grand Island, NY). Deoxynucleoside triphosphates, RevertAid M-MuLV Reverse Transcriptase, oligodT, RNase inhibitor and other chemicals for complementary DNA synthesis were from Fermentas (Ontario, Canada). Anti- PKCa, PKCb, PKCd, PKCth, PKCe, PKCz, PLD1, pAKT, AKT, procaspase 3 caspase 3, procaspase 8, caspase 8, Bax and Bcl-2 antibodies were purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (San Jose, CA). PKCa, PKCd, PLD1 small-interfering RNA (siRNA) and control siRNA were obtained from Santa Cruz Biotechnology.
Ethics Statement
This study was carried out in strict accordance with the recommendations in the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals of the National Institutes of Health. All experimental animal protocols received prior approval from the Institutional Animal Ethical Committee (Bose Institute, Registration Number: 95/99/CPCSEA).
Cell Culture
B16F10 murine melanoma cell was obtained from the American Type Culture Collection (Manassas, VA, USA), were maintained in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), antibiotics (120 mg/ml penicillin and 200 mg/ml streptomycin) and 2 mM L-glutamine. The cells were cultured in a humidified 5% CO2 incubator at 37degC. Primary melanocytes were isolated from adult skin, 10 to 15 cm2; 1-week-old, whole-back skin. The skin was washed in PBS, transferred to 0.25% trypsin, and digested overnight at 4degC. The epidermal and dermal layers were then separated and placed in 0.02% EDTA in PBS. Single cells were obtained by mincing the tissue with a razor blade. After centrifugation for 10 min at 1000 g, the cells were plated at 37degC with 5% CO2 in Melanocyte Growth Medium (MGM; Clonetics, San Diego, CA) supplemented with 5% FBS and 1X penicillin/streptomycin (Invitrogen). The cells were incubated for 14 days and the FBS was excluded from the medium after the first two days to prevent the growth of keratinocytes and fibroblasts. The medium was changed every two days and the supernatant was stored at -20degC as conditioned medium (CM). After 14 days, the cells were treated with 0.05% trypsin, split 1:3, and grown in 1/3 CM and 2/3 MGM for 2 weeks. The cells were maintained in MGM with 10% FBS. To obtain a pure melanocyte culture, 6x105 cells were serially diluted across and down a 96-well plate to obtain single cell clones. Single cells were identified in wells. These clones were expanded and the cells from well appeared to be pure melanocytes. To ensure that the cells were of melanocyte origin, tyrosinase expression was detected within the cells [32].
Preparation of Cell Lysates and Immunoblot Analysis
Cell lysates were prepared as described elsewhere [33]. Equal amounts of protein (40 ug) were subjected to 10% sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and were subsequently transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane. The membrane was blocked overnight with 3% bovine serum albumin in Tris-saline buffer (pH, 7.5), and immunoblotting was performed to detect PKCa, PKCb, PKCd, PKCth, PKCe, PKCz, PLD1, pAKT, AKT, procaspase 3, caspase 3, procaspase 8, caspase 8, Bax, Bcl-2 and GAPDH as described elsewhere [34].
Coimmunoprecipitation
Coimmunoprecipitation experiments were carried out to detect the PKCa-PLD1, PKCd-PLD1 interactions using a standard protocol described elsewhere [35].
Densitometry Analysis
Immunoblot were analyzed using a model GS-700 Imaging Densitometer and Molecular Analyst (version 1.5; Bio-Rad Laboratories).
Isolation of RNA and Semi Quantitative Polymerase Chain Reaction
Total RNA was extracted from cell via TRI reagent [36]. For cDNA synthesis, 1 ug of total RNA from each sample was reverse-transcribed using Revert Aid M-MuLV Reverse Transcriptase. cDNA from each sample was amplified with 0.5 unit Taq DNA polymerase in 50 ul reaction volume under the following conditions: initial activation step (2 min at 95degC) and cycling step (denaturation for 30 s at 94degC, annealing for 30 s at 54degC, and extension for 45 s at 72degC for 35 cycles), using Perkin Elmer Gen Amp PCR system 2400. Sequences of the PCR primers were as follows : PKCa: (forward, 5'-CCC ATT CCA GAA GGA GAT GA-3'), (reverse, 5'-TTC CTG TCA GCA AGC ATC AC-3'), PKCb: (forward, 5'-TCC CTG ATC CCA AAA GTG AG-3'), (reverse, 5'-AAC TTG AAC CAG CCA TCC AC-3'), PKCd : (forward, 5'-ACA AAT GCA GGC AAT GCA ACG), (reverse, 5'-GGC ATT TGT GGT GCA CAT TCA-3'), PKCth : (forward, 5'-TTG ATC TTT CCA GAG CCA CG-3'), (reverse, 5'-CTT CGC ATC TCC TAG CAT G-3'), PKCe: (forward, 5'-TTG GGA ATG CAG GGA ACG AAA-3'), (reverse, 5'-TCC ACG TGC AAT GGT TGG AA-3'), PKCz: (forward, 5'-AAG TGG GTG GAC AGT GAA GG-3'), (reverse, 5'-CAG CTT CCT CCA TCT TCT GG-3'). PCR amplified products were subsequently size fractioned on 1.5% agarose gel, stained with ethidium bromide and visualized under UV-light. Relative changes in PKCa, PKCb, PKCd, PKCth, PKCe, PKCz mRNA expression were compared, and normalized to GAPDH [37].
Cloning of PKCa and PKCd in Expression Vector pd2EGFPN1
The B16F10 melanoma cancer cell were cultured in DMEM (10% FCS). The mRNA from B16F10 cell was isolated using Trizol and converted to cDNA via cDNA synthesis kit (Roche, USA). The accession numbers of PKCa and PKCd are: NM_011101 and NM_011103. The following primers were used to clone PKCa (forward, 5'-CCG CTC GAG ATG GCT GAC GTT TAC CCG-3'; reverse, 5'-GGG GTA CCT CAT ACT GCA CTT TGC AAG ATT G-3') and PKCd (forward, 5'-CTA GCT AGC ATG GCA CCC TTC CTG CG-3'; reverse, 5'-CGC GGA TCC TTA AAT GTC CAG GAA TTG CTC AAA CTT G-3'). The gene products were cloned in TA vector (Promega, USA) as per manufacturer's protocol and subsequently sub-cloned in pd2EGFP-N1 vector using the restriction enzymes Xho 1 and KPN 1 for PKCa and NHE 1 and BAM H1 for PKCd (Roche, USA). The sequence of the clone was confirmed by automated sequencer (Applied Biosystems, USA).
Transfection and Generation of PKCa and PKCd Overexpressing Cell Line
B16F10 cells were transfected separately with PKCa and PKCd expression vector by using Lipofectamine PLUS reagent (GibcoBRL, Gaithersburg, MD) according to the manufacturer's directions. pd2EGFP-N1 vector alone was used as control. Transfected cells were selected with 800 mg/ml G418 for 15-20 days, and single colonies were collected to examine expression of PKC proteins by Western blot analysis. For transient transfection, 2x105 B16F10 cells were cultured on 6-well plates for 24 h, and transfected with control or PKCa and d cloned in pd2EGFP-N1 using Lipofectamine PLUS reagent for 3 h at 37degC. The cells were cultured in complete DMEM for additional 48 h and then subjected to Western blot analysis for PKCa and PKCd expression.
Preparation of PKCa, PKCd and PLD1-specific Small Interfering RNA
PKCa (forward, 5'-AAT CGT ACC GTG ACG TGG AGC CCT GTC TC-3'), (reverse, 5'-AAG CTC CAC GTC ACG GTA CGA CCT GTC TC-3'), PKCd (forward, 5'-AAC CTC ACT ACG CAT AGA CTG CCT GTC TC-3'), (reverse, 5'-AAC CTC ACT ACG CAT AGA CTG CCT GTC TC-3'), PLD1(forward, 5'-AAA GAG GTG GTT GAT AGT AAA CCT GTC TC-3'), (reverse, 5'-AAT TTA CTA TCA ACC ACC TCT CCT GTC TC-3') specific small interfering RNA (siRNA) were prepared using the Silencer siRNA Construction kit (Ambion) according to manufacturer's protocol. A nonspecific scrambled siRNA was generated with same GC content for control.
Flow Cytometry Analysis
1x106 B16F10 cells transfected with empty vector (EV), or overexpressed PKCa and PKCd plasmid were harvested, washed twice in ice-cold fluorescence-activated cell sorter (FACS) buffer (PBS containing 10% (w/v) BSA and 0.1% (w/v) sodium azide). Next, cells were collected by centrifugation (1,200 rpm for 5 min), and exposed to FITC-conjugated anti-mouse ceramide antibody for 1-2 hr at 4degC in the dark. After incubation, cells were washed in FACS buffer, and the percentage of cells expressing cell surface ceramide were determined by comparison of fluorescence emission intensities collected using FACS Verse.
For all Immunofluorescence analyses, B16F10 cells transfected with empty vector (EV), plasmid encoding overexpressed PKCa and PKCd were cultured overnight on coverslips and incubated. The cells were fixed with 3% paraformaldehyde for 15 min in ice and incubated in 0.5% Triton-X in PBS (25 min, room temperature). The fixed cells were then incubated with FITC-conjugated ceramide antibody for 1 hour at 4degC in the dark. Finally, the slides were washed and rinsed using mounting medium mixed with 4', 6-Diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) to stain the nucleus and were visualized under Immunofluorescence Microscope (Leica, Germany).
Detection of Cell Proliferation
1x106 B16F10 cells transfected with empty vector (EV), overexpressed plasmid encoding PKCa and PKCd were harvested and washed twice with PBS. Intracellular DNA was labeled with 1 ml of cold propidium iodide solution containing 0.1% Triton X-100, 0.1 mM EDTA, 0.05 mg/ml RNase A, 50 ug/ml propidium iodide in PBS, and further incubated on ice for 30 min in the dark. Cytometric analyses were performed using a flow cytometer (FACS Verse, Beckton Dickinson, NJ) and Cell Quest software.
Alternatively, (3H) - thymidine incorporation was determined. 1x104 cells transfected with empty vector (EV), plasmid encoding overexpressed PKCa and PKCd were seeded in 96-well multiplates. Each well was then pulsed with 1 mCi (3H) - thymidine (specific activity 20 Ci/mmol). Sixteen hours later, cells were washed twice with ice-cold PBS, treated with 5% trichloroacetic acid for 30 min at 4degC and solubilized with 0.5 N NaOH. (3H) - Thymidine incorporation was determined on liquid scintillation counter (Wallac 1409 DSA, Finland). Data points for all assays were obtained in triplicate, and expressed as cpm/ug protein. Background radioactivity from cell-free wells was determined and subtracted from all data points.
In vitro Tumor Apoptosis Assay
In vitro apoptosis of tumor cells was determined using the apoptosis detection kit (BD Pharmingen) as per the manufacturer's protocol. In brief, 1x106 cells were transfected with empty vector (EV) or overexpressed PKCa and PKCd plasmid incubated at 37degC in a humidified atmosphere with 5% CO2. After 48 hrs cells were washed with cold PBS and suspended in binding buffer and incubated with Annexin V-FITC and propidium iodide for 15 min at room temperature in the dark. Apoptotic cells were monitored by flow cytometric analysis.
Alternatively, cells undergoing apoptosis was measured by the TUNEL assay where cells were labeled with FITC-conjugated anti-BrdU MAb for 2 hrs at room temperature after resuspending the pellet in Tdt reaction buffer as per the manufacturer's instructions (Millipore, Germany). The coverslips were mounted on slides after rinsing using mounting medium mixed with 4', 6-Diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) to stain the nucleus. The slides were subjected to fluorescence microscopy using fluorescence microscope (Leica, Germany).
Statistical Analysis
Minimum of three mice was used per group for in vitro experiments. The data, represented as mean +- standard deviation (SD), is from one experiment, which was performed at least three times. Student's t test was employed to assess the significance of the differences between the mean values of control and experimental groups. A P value of less than 0.05 was considered significant and less than 0.001 was considered highly significant.

Results
Differential Regulation of Various Protein Kinase C Isotypes in B16F10 Melanoma Cells
Protein kinase C (PKC) isotypes exert differential effects on tumor progression by modulating the regulation of several intrinsic cellular processes [2], [38]. Accordingly, the expressions of different PKC isotypes were investigated in B16F10 melanoma cells. Among the various PKC isotypes, the expression of PKCa was found to be significantly augmented whereas; a marked attenuation in the expression of PKCd was observed in melanoma cells as compared to that of the control melanocytes (Figure 1A, 1B). Interestingly, the expression of other PKC isotypes was found to be unaltered in melanoma cells versus control melanocytes. Moreover, a significant enhancement of PKCa membrane translocation was observed after PMA treatment in compared to PKCd in melanoma cells (Figure 1C), which further suggested that melanoma tumor cells selectively enhanced the activity of PKCa and suppressed the activity of PKCd. Furthermore, the expression of PKCd and PKCa was found to be significantly downregulated in PKCa and PKCd overexpressed (PKCaOV and PKCdOV) melanoma cells respectively, whereas no significant changes in the expression of other PKC isotypes in either of the PKCaOV and PKCdOV melanoma cells were observed (Figure 1D). Therefore, our data suggested an existence of a reciprocal regulatory axis between PKCa and PKCd isotypes in B16F10 melanoma cells.
10.1371/journal.pone.0091656.g001
Figure 1
Differential expression of various PKC isotypes in B16F10 melanoma tumor.
(A) Cell lysates from primary melanocytes and B16F10 melanoma cells were subjected to western blot analysis with anti PKCa, PKCb, PKCd, PKCth, PKCe and PKCz specific antibodies. GAPDH was used as a reference. Representative figure and bar diagram of densitometric analysis from three independent experiments are presented. (B) 2x106 primary melanocytes and B16F10 melanoma cells were separately collected in Trizol for mRNA extraction and semi quantitative RT-PCR analyses for PKCa, PKCb, PKCd, PKCth, PKCe and PKCz were done. Representative figure and bar diagram of densitometric analysis of target gene with respect to GAPDH was presented. (C) 2x106 B16F10 melanoma cells were treated with PMA (100 nM) for 1 hr. Expression of PKCa and PKCd along with GAPDH in cytosolic and membrane protein fraction was analyzed by Western blot. Representative data from three independent experiments was given. (D) Cell lysates of B16F10 cells transfected with empty vector (EV), overexpressed full-length mouse PKCa (PKCaOV) or PKCd (PKCdOV) isotypes as mentioned in materials and methods were subjected to SDS PAGE and western blot analysis to check the respective expression of PKCa, PKCb, PKCd, PKCe, PKCth and PKCz isotypes. Representative figure from three independent experiments and bar diagram of densitometric analysis was depicted. GAPDH was used as a reference.
Counteregulatory Effect of PKCa and PKCd on B16F10 Melanoma Tumor Cell Proliferation is Regulated via PLD1
PKCa and PKCd isotypes are reported to exhibit opposing effect on the regulation of cell cycle progression in various cell types [16], [17]. Therefore, the effects of PKCa and PKCd over-expression on cell cycle progression and cell proliferation were studied in B16F10 melanoma cells. Interestingly, PKCaOV resulted in a lower number of cells in G0/G1phase, indicating enhanced G1-S transition whereas, PKCdOV revealed a significant increase in the number of cells in G0/G1phase and a concomitant decrease in the number of cells in S phase, indicating that PKCd halted G1-S transition resulting in cell cycle arrest (Figure 2A). Analysis of cell proliferation via (3H) - Thymidine incorporation has also revealed a significant increase in the number of PKCaOV cell compared to PKCdOV (Figure 2B). Since, PKCa positively regulates phospholipase D1 (PLD1) activity in human melanoma and PLD1 plays a pivotal role in tumor cell proliferation [18], [19]. Hence, we studied whether PKCaOV or PKCdOV regulates PLD1 expression in melanoma tumor cells. Interestingly, PLD1 expression was found significantly higher in PKCaOV cell compared to PKCdOV. Moreover, consistent with the antagonistic behavior, silencing of PKCa and PKCd by respective siRNAs exhibited a marked downregulation and augmentation of PLD1 expression respectively (Figure 2C). Therefore, we intended to study the association of PLD1 with these two PKC isotypes since from previous observations, both isotypes were found to inhibit the expression of other. Therefore, on coimmunprecipitation with PKCa and PLD1 antibody, PKCaOV cells showed a strong association between PKCa and PLD1 along with a concomitant downregulation of the PKCd-PLD1 interaction. The association between PKCa-PLD1 was found to be augmented in PKCdsiRNA transfected melanoma cells (Figure 2D). Whereas, PKCdOV exhibited opposing effect on PKCa-PLD1 interaction when coimmunoprecipitated with PKCd and PLD1 antibody (Figure 2E). Therefore, these results were suggestive of the fact that PKCa executed as a positive regulator of PLD1 expression by promoting protein-protein interaction, and simultaneously observed PKCd deficiency endorses sustained PKCa-PLD1 interactions for B16F10 melanoma tumor cell proliferation.
10.1371/journal.pone.0091656.g002
Figure 2
Influence of PKCa and PKCd on cell proliferation and their interaction with PLD1.
(A) B16F10 cells transfected with empty vector (EV) or overexpressed full-length mouse PKCa (PKCaOV) or PKCd (PKCdOV) isotypes as mentioned in materials and methods were harvested for 48 hrs and stained with propidium iodide to measure the DNA content by flow cytometry. (B) B16F10 cell transfected with EV, PKCaOV and PKCdOV isotypes were measured for incorporation of (3H) - thymidine to determine cell proliferation. (*p<0.001). Expression of PKCdOV compared to PKCaOV. Results were expressed as mean+-SD, and are representative of three independent experiments. (C) Whole cell lysates from the stable transfectants of B16F10 cells overexpressing PKCa (PKCaOV), PKCd (PKCdOV), or the empty vector (EV) and the siRNA oligonucleotides specific to PKCa (PKCa siRNA), PKCd (PKCd siRNA) or control siRNA were subjected to Western blot analysis for PLD1 expression. Representative data from three independent experiments was given compared to GAPDH.(D) In a separate set, B16F10 cells transfected with empty vector (EV), full-length mouse PKCaOV and PKCdOV, siRNA oligonucleotides specific to PKCa, PKCd and control siRNA respectively as mentioned in materials and methods. The whole cell lysates from each transfected cells were subjected to immunoprecipitation with anti Phospholipase D1 (PLD1) antibody and the blots were probed with anti-PKCa respectively. (E) Similarly, the whole cell lysates from each transfected cells were subjected to immunoprecipitation with anti PLD1 antibody and the blots were probed with anti-PKCd respectively. The blot shown is a representative of experiments performed in triplicate. GAPDH was used as a reference.
Modulatory Effect of PKCa and PKCd Overexpression on PLD1 Revealed Antagonistic Effect on AKT and Ceramide Signaling in B16F10 Melanoma Cells
Besides PLD1, which regulates tumor cell proliferation, the balance between AKT activation and ceramide generation also plays a central role in the determination of cell fate either towards survival or apoptosis [39], [40]. Moreover, PKC isotypes were known to regulate ceramide or AKT expression differentially in various cell types. Therefore, we intended to examine whether overexpression or respective silencing of PKCa and PKCd had any regulatory effect on AKT activation and ceramide generation in melanoma cells. Interestingly, PKCaOV induced a high level of AKT phosphorylation compared to PKCdOV, whereas PKCa silencing lowered the AKT phosphorylation (Figure 3A). On contrary enhanced ceramide generation was exhibited in PKCdOV melanoma cells compared to PKCaOV. Furthermore, PKCd silencing lowered the ceramide generation with respect to PKCa (Figure 3B, Figure S1). Hence, consistent with our previous observation, melanoma cells were found to selectively promote PKCa-PLD1 interactions by suppressing PKCd to enhance cell proliferation, and in different cancer cells PLD1 is known as a positive regulator of cell survival [18], [19]. Considering these two inter-regulatory facts next we sought to investigate whether PLD1 has any effect in the regulation of AKT activation or ceramide generation in PKCa and PKCd overexpressed melanoma cells. Interestingly, inhibition of PLD1 in PKCaOV B16F10 melanoma cell attenuated AKT phosphorylation and enhanced ceramide generation. Whereas, PLD1 silencing in PKCdOV melanoma cells showed minimal AKT phosphorylation and exhibited elevated ceramide generation (Figure 3C, 3D). Therefore, B16F10 melanoma tumor promotes PKCa-PLD1 interaction dependent AKT activation to strategically block PKCd dependent ceramide generation to secure pro-survival signal.
10.1371/journal.pone.0091656.g003
Figure 3
Modulatory role of PKCa and PKCd on the expression of pAKT and ceramide levels.
(A) B16F10 cells transfected with EV, full-length mouse PKCaOV, PKCdOV and siRNA oligonucleotides specific to PKCa (PKCa siRNA), PKCd (PKCd siRNA) or the control siRNA were collected and the whole cell lysates prepared from transfected cells and the expression of pAKT or AKT respectively were analyzed with respect to GAPDH by Western blotting. Representative blots from three independent experiments were given. (B) The transfected cells comprising empty vector (EV), overexpressed PKCa (PKCaOV), PKCd (PKCdOV) or siRNAs corresponding to PKCa (PKCa siRNA), PKCd (PKCd siRNA) and control siRNA were stained with anti-mouse ceramide-FITC, isotype-matched control mouse antibody, and analyzed by flow cytometry for ceramide (FL1) expression. (C) B16F10 transfectants overexpressing full-length mouse PKCa (PKCOV), PKCd (PKCdOV) or empty vector (EV) were transfected with PLD1 siRNA as mentioned in materials and methods and harvested for 24 hours. The expression of pAKT and AKT was analysed in whole cell lysates by Western blotting. (D) Similarly full-length mouse PKCa (PKCaOV), PKCd (PKCdOV) or empty vector (EV) transfected B16F10 melanoma cells treated with PLD1 siRNA and subsequently stained with anti-mouse ceramide-FITC, isotype-matched control mouse antibody. Ceramide (FL1) expression was analysed by flow cytometry. Data represented here are from one of three independent experiments.
PKCd and PLD1 Reciprocally Regulate aSMase Mediated Ceramide Signaling in B16F10 Melanoma Cells
Our previous results suggest a positive regulatory role of PKCd in ceramide generation which subsequently blocks AKT activation. More importantly, ceramide, a pleiotropic lipid second messenger can be generated by either denovo pathway or salvage pathway plays a central role in the plethora of cellular functions, including survival and apoptosis [24]-[27]. Therefore we intended to study the role executed by PKCd and AKT or PLD1 signaling on the pathway of ceramide generation in melanoma cell. As shown, we pretreated the melanoma cells either with FB1 or imipramine, the specific inhibitors of de novo or aSMase mediated ceramide generation pathway respectively. Interestingly, imipramine treatment resulted in a significant downregulation of ceramide generation whereas, FB1 treatment failed to do so in PKCdOV melanoma cells. Therefore, these findings clearly depicted that PKCd selectively augmented the aSMase dependent ceramide generation pathway in melanoma cells (Figure 4A, Figure S2). On contrary, imipramine treatment compared to FB1 enhanced pAKT expression in PKCdOV melanoma cells further confirming the regulatory role of aSMase mediated ceramide generation on AKT activation (Figure 4B). Moreover, we investigated whether PLD1 had any role on the pathway involved in the regulation of ceramide generation in PKCdOV melanoma cells, since PKCd over-expression downregulates PLD1 expression. Interestingly, Imipramine treatment augmented PLD1 expression, whereas, FB1 treatment had no such effect on PLD1 expression in PKCdOV melanoma tumor cells (Figure 4C). Thereby, our data further highlighted the fact that PKCd mediated ceramide generation negatively regulated PLD1 or AKT signaling via aSMase pathway.
10.1371/journal.pone.0091656.g004
Figure 4
Regulatory effect of PKCd and PLD1 on aSMase mediated ceramide generation.
(A) B16F10 cells overexpressing full-length mouse PKCd (PKCdOV) or empty vector (EV) were treated with Fumonisin B1(FB1) (10 uM) and Imipramine (10 uM) respectively for 1 hour. The transfected cells were washed and after 24 hour of incubation were stained with anti-mouse ceramide-FITC, isotype-matched control mouse antibody, and analyzed by flow cytometry for ceramide (FL1) expression. Representative data exhibited were from three independent experiments. (B) The transfectants of B16F10 cells overexpressing PKCd (PKCdOV) or the empty vector (EV) were treated with FB1 (10 uM) and Imipramine (10 uM) for 1 hour. The transfected cells were washed and after 24 hours of incubation the whole cell lysates were subjected to SDS-PAGE and Western blot analysis to study the expression of pAKT and total AKT. Data represented here are from one of three independent experiments. (C) Similarly, B16F10 cells transfected with empty vector (EV) and full-length PKCd (PKCdOV) were treated with FB1 (10 uM) and Imipramine (10 uM) as mentioned previously and expression of PLD1 was analysed by western blotting. Data represented here are from one of three independent experiments. GAPDH was used as a reference.
Strategic Upregulation of PKCd Isotypes Promote Ceramide-mediated Cellular Apoptosis in B16F10 Melanoma Tumor Cell
Ceramide generation can induce cellular apoptosis via activation of caspase cascade [25], [26]; however, in melanoma cells PKCa-PLD1 axis indeed downregulates the PKCd-dependent ceramide synthesis to escape the regular programmed cell death or apoptosis. Therefore, we investigated whether the strategic upregulation of PKCd or PKCa in stably transfected B16F10 melanoma tumor cells shows reciprocal regulation on anti or pro-apoptotic signaling and ultimately on cellular apoptosis. Interestingly, we observed a significantly higher level of caspase3 and caspase8 activation in PKCdOV B16F10 melanoma tumor cells compared to PKCaOV or empty vector (EV) transfected cells (Figure 5A). Next, we studied the expression of pro- and anti-apoptotic cell intrinsic factors (balance of which regulates the ultimate cell fate) in stably transfected PKCaOV as well as PKCdOV B16F10 melanoma tumor cells. Interestingly, PKCdOV resulted in a significant enhancement of pro-apoptotic factor, Bax, along with a concomitant decrease in the anti-apoptotic factor, Bcl-2; compared to the empty vector (EV) transfected B16F10 melanoma tumor cells. In contrast, PKCaOV cells exhibited a significantly higher level of Bcl-2 expression with no corresponding increase in the Bax expression compared to the transfected empty vector (EV) (Figure 5B). Likewise, percentage of both Annexin V (+) early and Annexin V (+) PI (+) late apoptotic cells were found to be increased in PKCdOV B16F10 melanoma cell compared to the empty vector (EV) or PKCaOV cells (Figure 5C). Analogous to this, immunoflorescense of tunnel assay performed on PKCaOV and PKCdOV melanoma tumor cells further focused the involvement of PKCd in the induction of cellular apoptosis (Figure 5D). Therefore, these findings suggested that the over-expression of PKCd promotes ceramide generation which in turn can activate the cascade of caspases to induce apoptosis in B16F10 melanoma tumor cell.
10.1371/journal.pone.0091656.g005
Figure 5
Regulatory effect of PKCa and PKCd on caspase cascade and apoptosis.
(A) Whole cell lysates of B16F10 cells, transfected with empty vector (EV), full-length mouse PKCa (PKCaOV) and PKCd (PKCdOV) plasmid as mentioned in materials and methods were probed by Western blotting to study the expression of pro Caspase 3, Caspase 3, pro Caspase 8, and Caspase 8. Representative data from three independent experiments was shown compared to GAPDH. (B) Whole cell lysates of B16F10 cells, transfected with empty vector (EV), full-length mouse PKCa (PKCaOV) and PKCd (PKCdOV) plasmid were probed by Western blotting to study the expression of Bax and Bcl2 respectively. The ratio of Bax (proapoptotic)/Bcl2 (antiapoptotic) were represented on a log scale. (C) Similarly B16F10 cells, transfected with control vector (EV), full-length mouse PKCa (PKCaOV) and PKCd (PKCdOV) plasmid as mentioned in materials and methods were stained with Annexin-V FITC and PI and analyzed by flow cytometry. Data represented here are from one of three independent experiments. (D) B16F10 cells, transfected with control vector (EV), full-length mouse PKCa (PKCaOV) and PKCd (PKCdOV) plasmid as mentioned in materials and methods were stained with FITC-BrdU for tunnel assay and analysed by immunofluorescence microscopy.

Discussion
The multifaceted regulatory activity of PKC isotypes on various cellular and pathophysiological process stem the growing interest on the subject of PKC mediated cell proliferation and survival in different cell types [2]-[4]. Previously from our lab reciprocal regulation of various PKC isoforms and the resultant effect due to the selective impairment of PKC isotypes were studied in various infectious diseases [7], [8]. However in this present manuscript, the existence of a complex reciprocal regulatory axis between the two PKC isotypes namely PKCa and PKCd among the six major PKC isotypes were reported in the highly metastatic B16F10 melanoma tumor cells. The differential involvement of PKC isotypes in regulating various aspects of cell proliferation, cell cycle progression, and cellular differentiation of both normal as well as transformed cells are well documented along with the reciprocal effects of PKCa and PKCd isotypes executed on cell proliferation and survival in various cancers [15]-[17]. The responses induced by activation or overexpression of PKCa vary depending on the cell types, and sometimes condition of cells. For example, in some types of cells, PKCa is implicated in cell growth. In contrast, it may play a role in cell cycle arrest and differentiation in other cell types. Therefore, alterations of cell responses induced by PKC are not an intrinsic property of this isoform. The responses are modulated by dynamic interactions with cell-type specific factors like substrates, modulators and anchoring proteins [41]-[43]. Concurrent with these reports the expression of PKCa was found to be specifically upregulated, whereas, a marked attenuation of PKCd expression was observed in this melanoma tumor cells. However other PKC isotypes studied in these cells shows almost unaltered expression in both melanoma and melanocytes.
To further validate the observed differential activity and expression of PKCa and PKCd isotypes in regulating the cellular processes of B16F10 melanoma tumor an efficient system was adopted by transfecting respective plasmid for overexpressing and corresponding siRNA for silencing. This system allows us to sequentially delineate the downstream consequence that ultimately associated with cell fate. Interestingly, PKCd and PKCa isotypes were selectively downregulated in PKCaOV and PKCdOV cells respectively. More importantly these selective PKCaOV or PKCdsiRNA has shown to induce cell proliferation, whereas PKCdOV B16F10 melanoma cells exhibited converse regulation. This finding seems encouraging since, PKCa stimulates cellular growth by inducing cell proliferation [41] whereas; PKCd isotype exerts growth inhibitory function in a large number of cell types by inhibiting the G1 to S cell-cycle transition [44], [45].
The second important observations demonstrated a strong expression and association of PLD1 with PKCa in PKCaOV melanoma cells which in line with previous observations found attenuated in PKCdOV system. Masahiro Oka et al reported PKCa mediated PLD1 activation in human melanoma cells. Since, same PKC isotypes exerts differential effects in different system [20]. Keeping this fact in mind the crosstalk between these two important molecules with PLD1 was studied subsequently in B16F10 melanoma cell. PLD1 plays an important role in proliferation or survival by inducing the activation of AKT signaling [18], [19]. In our system, PLD1 silencing markedly attenuated AKT activation and induced higher level of ceramide generation in PKCaOV and PKCdOV melanoma cells respectively. The actual balance between AKT and ceramide signaling determines the cell fate towards survival or apoptosis and previous lab findings has also highlighted opposing effect of AKT and ceramide on each other [6].
Several studies have further reported upstream regulation of PKC on AKT signaling but there are controversies as to whether PKC is a positive or negative regulator of AKT. For example, Doornbos et al. have shown that AKT and PKC did not influence the activity of respective kinases, but growth factor-induced activation of AKT was abolished by PKCz [46]. Partovian et al have shown that PKCa translocates to the membrane raft in response to insulin growth factors stimulation and directly phosphorylates AKT1 at ser473 sites in endothelial cells [47]. In contrast, activation of PKCd and PKCe provide a negative regulation for AKT phosphorylation and kinase activity in mouse keratinocytes and serve as modulators of cell survival pathways in response to external stimuli.
Similar to AKT signaling, several studies have also indicated the regulation of ceramide generation by modulating PKC isotypes [30], [31]. Thus how PKCa-AKT and PKCd-ceramide counter interact with each other depends on the cellular intrinsic level of specific PKC isotypes, PLD expression, and extracellular stimulus as well as on the cell types. As found in our system B16F10 melanoma cells preferentially activate PKCa, induces strong interaction with PLD1 and this PKCa-PLD1 axis promotes AKT mediated cell proliferation by simultaneously suppressing the PKCd activity. On the other hand, strategic upregulation of PKCd prevents PKCa-PLD1 interactions and therefore, eventually promoted ceramide generation by hindering AKT activation. In this study, the regulatory effect of PKCd on the ceramide synthesis pathway is also studied using the pharmacological inhibitors imipramine and FB1. Endogenous ceramide generation via various stimuli functions either through the de novo pathway or salvage pathway and acts as a tumor-suppressor lipid by activating several kinases, phosphatases, caspase cascade and ultimately triggering apoptotic signaling. Therefore deregulated ceramide generation and sphingolipid metabolism were found to associate with the survival of cancer cell and resistance to therapy. Sumimoto et al reported that anticancer drug, etopside induced PKCd mediated ceramide generation by both de novo and nSMase pathway in prostate cancer cell [48]. Parallely our results suggested one of the crucial roles of PKCd in generating ceramide by inducing aSMase dependent pathway and abrogating PLD1 expression.
Malignant cell employed several strategies to escape or bypass the regular program-cell-death pathway or apoptosis for their uncontrolled cellular proliferation. Consistent with the previous observation in melanoma cells we observed resistance to apoptosis in PKCaOV cells. Whereas, PKCdOV can break these resistance against apoptotic signaling by inducing ceramide mediated pro-apoptotic cascade and simultaneously preventing AKT activation. The expression of pro and antiapoptotic factors respectively Bax and Bcl2 were found to be reciprocally regulated by PKC a and PKCd overexpression and more importantly the ratio between Bax/Bcl2 was found to be tilted towards cellular apoptosis in PKCdOV melanoma cell, which is otherwise deregulated in growing B16F10 melanoma cells. It is therefore logical to speculate that tumor explored these differential PKC isotypes expressions and associated downstream signaling to secure its survival benefits.
In conclusion, our data suggested the reciprocal regulation of PKCa and PKCd in B16F10 melanoma cell survival and apoptosis. Our data also established a global link of PKCa and PLD1 in induction of AKT-dependent melanoma cells proliferation/survival. On the other hand, melanoma tumor cell preferentially suppressed PKCd expression to ensure the blockade of aSMase mediated ceramide generation and apoptosis. This deregulated PKCd-ceramide cascade in melanoma tumor cells might be corrected either by reinforcing the PKCd overexpression or by using PKCa antagonist to restrain uncontrolled melanoma tumor growth. Nevertheless, the validation of these in vitro data in in vivo system needs further evaluation. Moreover it is also required to establish whether all malignant cells exploit this PKCa-PLD1-AKT pathway or it is melanoma specific and whether selective PKCd overexpression trigger cellular apoptosis in all malignant cell. Collectively our data open up the possibilities to explore the differential PKC and downstream signaling molecules particularly ceramide as a novel therapeutic strategy to combat melanoma disease.

Supporting Information
Figure S1
Differential effect of PKCa and PKCd modulation on ceramide generation. B16F10 cells transfected with EV, full-length mouse PKCaOV, PKCdOV and siRNA oligonucleotides specific to PKCa, PKCd or the control siRNA were stained with anti-mouse ceramide-FITC, and analyzed by fluorescence microscopy for ceramide expression as mentioned in materials and methods.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
Figure S2
Effect of PKCdOV on ceramide generation pathway. B16F10 cells overexpressing full-length mouse PKCd or empty vector (EV) were treated with FB1 (10 uM) and Imipramine (10 uM) respectively for 1 hour. The transfected cells were washed and after 24 hour of incubation were stained with anti-mouse ceramide-FITC, and analyzed by fluorescence microscopy for ceramide expression as mentioned in materials and methods.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
