[Abstract, Methods, Mixed]

Melanoma genome sequencing reveals frequent PREX2 mutations. Melanoma is notable for its metastatic propensity, lethality in the advanced setting, and association with ultraviolet (UV) exposure early in life1. To obtain a comprehensive genomic view of melanoma, we sequenced the genomes of 25 metastatic melanomas and matched germline DNA. A wide range of point mutation rates was observed: lowest in melanomas whose primaries arose on non-UV exposed hairless skin of the extremities (3 and 14 per Mb genome), intermediate in those originating from hair-bearing skin of the trunk (range = 5 to 55 per Mb), and highest in a patient with a documented history of chronic sun exposure (111 per Mb). Analysis of whole-genome sequence data identified PREX2 - a PTEN-interacting protein and negative regulator of PTEN in breast cancer2 - as a significantly mutated gene with a mutation frequency of approximately 14% in an independent extension cohort of 107 human melanomas. PREX2 mutations are biologically relevant, as ectopic expression of mutant PREX2 accelerated tumor formation of immortalized human melanocytes in vivo. Thus, whole-genome sequencing of human melanoma tumors revealed genomic evidence of UV pathogenesis and discovered a new recurrently mutated gene in melanoma.

METHODS SUMMARY
The complete genomes of 25 metastatic melanomas and patient-matched germline samples were sequenced to approximately 30x and 30x haploid coverage, respectively, on an Illumina GAIIx sequencer (5 cases), and approximately 65x and 32x haploid coverage, respectively, on an Illumina HiSeq 2000 sequencer (20 cases) as paired-end 101-nucleotide reads. Read pairs were aligned to the reference human genome (hg19) using BWA29. Somatic alterations (single base substitutions, small insertions and deletions, and structural rearrangements) were identified according to their presence in the tumor genome and absence from the corresponding normal genome. A subset of rearrangements were validated by PCR and an independent sequencing technology in order to assess the specificity of the detection algorithm. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) was performed to confirm the high level amplification and rearrangement of PREX2. Significantly mutated genes were identified by comparing the observed mutations to the background mutation rates calculated for different sequence context categories per tumor sample. 40 exons of PREX2 were sequenced by PCR and bidirectional capillary sequencing in a validation panel of 107 additional melanoma tumors and short term cultures; mutations were confirmed as somatic by sequencing matched normal DNA. For gain of function studies,PREX2 mutation constructs were engineered and introduced to PMELcell lines by lentiviral transduction. To assess the oncogenic roles of PREX2 mutants, PMEL-NRAS* cells were injected subcutaneously into NUDE mice, and tumor growth was measured over time. A complete description of the materials and methods is provided in the Supplementary Information. All Illumina sequence data are publicly available in dbGaP (accession number phs000452.v1.p1).

Supplementary Material
1
2
3
