[Abstract, Introduction, Methods, Results, Discussion, Discussion]

Cutaneous melanoma in the State of S?o Paulo: a spatial
approach*. BACKGROUND Cutaneous melanoma is a skin cancer with low incidence but high mortality rates. Several factors are associated with increased risk of melanoma, such as excessive sun exposure, fair skin, and family history, among others. Little is known about the spatial distribution of this cancer in Brazil.   OBJECTIVE To identify, through the use of geostatistical tools, spatial clusters of municipalities in the state of Sao Paulo based on their incidence of cutaneous melanoma.   METHODS This was an ecological and exploratory study of data on new cases obtained from Fundacao Oncocentro for the period 1 January 2006-31 December 2011. Cases were separated by gender and rates per 100,000 inhabitants were calculated and used to compile thematic maps, Moran maps and kernel maps, using TerraView software.   RESULTS There were 3,172 new cases of cutaneous melanoma in the study period. High rates were identified in the North, Northwest, Southwest, and Southeast regions of Sao Paulo state. Global Moran's I values were statistically significant (p<0.05) at 0.12, 0.08, and 0.16, respectively, for males, females, and all cases. Areas such as the Southeast, North, and Northwest of Sao Paulo were identified as being of high priority for intervention.   CONCLUSION  Spatial clusters of municipalities with high incidence rates of cutaneous melanoma in the state of Sao Paulo were identified. These data can serve as an important input for public health agencies.

INTRODUCTION
Cancer, according to the Brazilian National Cancer Institute (INCA), is the name
given to a set of diseases that share the characteristic of unfettered cell growth.
These cells divide rapidly and tend to be aggressive and invade tissues and
organs.1 In the year 2011
alone, 161 deaths attributable to cancer occurred in the state of Sao
Paulo.2
Skin cancer can be broadly divided into three types: basal cell carcinoma (BCC),
squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) - together, these two types constitute the nonmelanoma
skin cancers (NMSC) - and cutaneous melanoma (CM), or melanoma of the skin.
In the United States, the incidence of melanoma has increased by 4-6% every
year.3 Cutaneous melanoma
has a low incidence, with an estimated 3,170 new cases in men and 3,060 new cases in
women expected to have occurred in Brazil in 2012, but is highly lethal, which makes
its diagnosis extremely important. In the state of Sao Paulo, the crude incidence
rate of melanoma, as estimated by INCA, is 5.58 per 100,000 men and 5.59 per 100,000
women (2012 data).4
Regarding the epidemiological profile of affected patients, melanoma is slightly
predominant in women, between the ages of 50 and 60, and in fair-skinned
individuals.5-8 In a Brazilian study, the most
common site of involvement was the trunk in men and the lower extremities in women,
with a statistically significant gender difference,6 which coincides with other studies conducted in the
country.7,9,10 Regarding
histological subtype, in a study carried out in Southern Brazil, the most common
type was superficial spreading melanoma (62.8%), followed by lentigo maligna (14.9%)
and nodular melanoma (14.6%).10
The risk factors for cutaneous melanoma are many and varied, and include excessive
sun exposure, fair skin, congenital nevus, xeroderma pigmentosum, dysplastic nevus,
past medical history of skin cancer, and family history of melanoma, thus subsuming
genetic factors.11,12
Given these risk factors, it is reasonable to expect that certain regions, such as
those with a population composed predominantly of fair-skinned, red-haired,
pale-eyed individuals who burn easily and tan with difficulty and those with large
populations of rural workers with a history of intense sun exposure, would have
higher incidence rates of melanoma skin cancer. Particularly in Brazil, a country
with a large immigrant population of European origin or descent and with large rural
areas characterized by agricultural work, clusters of melanoma occurrence are
believed to occur in several regions and states.
In view of the foregoing, the objective of this study was to identify, by means of
geostatistical analysis, spatial clusters of municipalities in the state of Sao
Paulo on the basis of their incidence rates of cutaneous melanoma.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
This is an ecological, exploratory, population-based study concerning the period 1
January 2006-31 December 2011. The area of interest is the state of Sao Paulo.
The state of Sao Paulo is located in the south of the Southeast region of Brazil. It
is slightly larger than the United Kingdom in area and is the most populous state in
Brazil, with over 40 million inhabitants, predominantly of Italian and Portuguese
descent, as well as approximately 3 million immigrants of 70 different
nationalities. In addition to hosting the largest industrial park in Brazil and
leading the country in economic output, the state of Sao Paulo is also important in
the fields of agriculture and animal husbandry.13
Data on new cases of cutaneous melanoma diagnosed in individuals of all ages from all
municipalities in the state of Sao Paulo were obtained from Fundacao Oncocentro
(FOSP)14 and stratified by
gender (female or male). The populations of each of the 645 municipalities of the
state of Sao Paulo as of 2008 were obtained from the DATASUS web portal. These data
were multiplied by six to provide an estimate for the 6-year study period. Thus, we
calculated the incidence rates per 100,000 inhabitants inhabitants for later
geostatistical analysis.
Global Moran's I indices were obtained to ascertain whether
cutaneous melanoma incidence rates in each municipality were spatially correlated
with the rates observed in neighboring municipalities. The global Moran's I
establishes the extent to which the value observed in a given region is
independent from the values of this variable observed in neighboring locales; if
positive, it is indicative of positive spatial autocorrelation. Positive values
(between 0 and +1) denote direct spatial autocorrelation, whereas negative values
(between 0 and -1) denote inverse autocorrelation.
Thematic maps were constructed from the new case rates in men, in women, and in the
overall population, with their respective means displayed as cutoff points in the
map legends, and Moran's maps were constructed for the male, female, and overall
populations. Moran's maps were chosen to display which municipalities are at high or
low priority of intervention to reduce the incidence of the event of interest.
Kernel maps are a statistical method that allows estimation of case density by
smoothing incidence rates, and can be used to identify hotspots (areas of high case
density). A kernel map was constructed for the overall population of all
municipalities in the state of Sao Paulo, enabling estimation of which
municipalities have a high or low density of new cases of cutaneous melanoma.
As this was an ecological study and no subjects are identified, it did not require
submission to the local Research Ethics Committee for approval.
Spatial analysis was carried out in the TerraView 3.3.1 software suite, made
available by the National Space Research Institute of Brazil (INPE).

RESULTS
For the period 1 January 2006-31 December 2011, FOSP tallied 3,172 new cases of
cutaneous melanoma in the state of Sao Paulo, with a mean (SD) frequency of 4.91
(38.3) cases per municipality, ranging from 0 to 959 cases (the latter found in the
city of Sao Paulo). This represents an overall incidence of 1.32 cases per 100,000
inhabitants inhabitants - 1.33 per 100,000 in men and 1.25 per 100,000 in women. Men
accounted for 50.3% of all cases, and women, for the remaining 49.7%. Analysis of
yearly rates over time did not show an upward or downward trend in the incidence of
cutaneous melanoma (data not shown).
The maps generated from the male, female, and overall incidence rates are presented
in figure 1. Interestingly, high incidence
rates (with means shown as cutoff points in the map legends) spared the coastal,
capital, and Northeast regions of the state almost exclusively, predominating
instead in the North, Northwest, Southwest, and Southeast regions. Table 1 lists the 10 municipalities with the
highest incidence rates of cutaneous melanoma for the overall population. More than
200 municipalities had a rate of zero, i.e., no cases of cutaneous melanoma were
diagnosed during the study period.
FIGURE 1
Incidence rates of cutaneous melanoma (number of new cases per 100,000
inhabitants). A) Male population; B) female
population; C) overall population. State of Sao Paulo, Brazil,
2006-2011
Moran's maps for the male, female, and overall populations are shown in figure 2, and demonstrate that municipalities
located mostly in the Southeast, North, and part of the Northwest regions of the
state as high-priority targets for intervention. Global Moran's I
indices were statistically significant (p<0.05), at 0.12, 0.08, and 0.16
respectively for male, female, and total cases in the 645 municipalities assessed,
showing high positive spatial correlation in these cases. This denotes greater
independence of the values assigned to one municipality in contradistinction to the
indices of neighboring municipalities.
FIGURE 2
Moran's maps showing municipalities of high and low priority for public
health interventions. A) Male population; B)
female population; C) overall population. State of Sao Paulo,
Brazil, 2006-2011
The kernel map for the overall population showed a high density of cases in the
Southeast, Northwest, and North regions of the state (Figure 3).
FIGURE 3
Kernel map showing densities of cutaneous melanoma incidence rates in the
overall population, state of Sao Paulo, Brazil, 2006-2011

DISCUSSION
Few Brazilian geostatistical studies have addressed topics such as skin cancer; this
was the first to assess cutaneous melanoma. This cancer is an extremely important
public health issue in view of its high mortality rate, and it is imperative that
areas with higher incidence rates of diagnosis and areas requiring stronger public
health interventions be identified.15
The incidence rates found in the present study were slightly higher in the male
population, which runs contrary to the findings of Bonfa et al.10
We observed high incidence rates of cutaneous melanoma in female, male, and overall
populations in the North, Northwest, Southwest, and Southeast regions of the state,
corresponding mostly to the municipalities of Sao Jose do Rio Preto, Ribeirao Preto,
Araraquara, Bauru, Marilia, and part of Sorocaba. These areas, in turn, are strongly
involved in the food and drink industry, with sugarcane and orange plantations being
most prominent, as well as maize, soy, coffee, cotton, peanut, and bean agriculture.
This spatial cluster may be explained by greater sun exposure without appropriate
protection among workers in these regions, as solar ultraviolet radiation is known
to be a complete carcinogen in humans.16
Ultraviolet radiation is divided into UVA, UVB, and UVC, with UVA being most closely
associated with photoaging and development of skin cancer, as it may indirectly
generate free radicals.17 UVB is
usually associated with acute and chronic skin damage, such as spots, burns,
peeling, and skin cancer. UVC radiation is largely absorbed by the ozone layer, and
only a small amount reaches the population.18
Another factor that must be taken into account is the cultural, demographic, and
ethnic heterogeneity of Brazil in general and of Sao Paulo state in particu-lar. The
coffee boom of the 1840s drove massive numbers of immigrants to the state,
particularly from Italy, Portugal, and Spain, and, to a lesser extent, Japan,
Austria, and Germany. This might influence our finding of higher cutaneous melanoma
incidence rates in certain regions of the state, especially due to the
characteristic skin phototypes of these immigrant populations. It is known that
individuals with fair skin, hair, and eyes are at greater risk of developing
melanoma.5 Therefore, the
historical influx of European immigrants may have contributed to the higher case
density in certain regions of the state.
The Moran maps obtained enable objective visualization of which municipalities in the
state have a high or low need for intervention. The latter correspond essentially to
municipalities in the regions of Presidente Prudente, the Greater Sao Paulo area,
Santos, the Ribeira River Valley, and Sao Jose dos Campos. Interestingly, these are
more industrialized regions, with a strong presence of industrial activity related
to oil, ethanol, metallurgy, and chemical manufacturing. The resident and working
population is possibly less exposed to solar radiation due to indoor work most of
the time. Municipalities such as Votuporanga, Sao Joaquim da Barra, Sao Jose do Rio
Preto, Monte Aprazivel, among others, showed a pressing need for intervention.
The kernel map enabled identification of a higher incidence of cases in the
Southeast, Northeast, and North regions of the state, which correspond to the
vicinity of Ribeirao Preto and to the boundary between the municipalities of Sao
Jose do Rio Preto and Aracatuba. These regions are characterized by modern beef
cattle production, orange and sugarcane agriculture, and maize, soy, coffee, cotton,
peanut, and bean plantations.
Some limitations of this study must be noted, such as the fact that we did not take
into account individual risk factors (e.g. sun exposure and sunscreen use). Another
limitation is the possibility of diagnostic error, as rural regions of the State may
have limited access to diagnostic methods and specialists in the field; this, in
turn, may cause underestimation of actual incidence rates. On the other hand,
analysis of pooled data for a 6-year period enabled identification of spatial
clusters with higher incidence rates, minimizing potential fluctuations in these
rates.

CONCLUSION
We were able to identify spatial clusters of municipalities with high incidence rates
of cutaneous melanoma in the state of Sao Paulo. These findings serve as an
important input for public agencies, and can be used to support educational and
awareness-building campaigns in some municipalities, as several strategies are
available for prevention of cutaneous melanoma, a highly lethal form of cancer.
