[Abstract, Introduction, Methods, Results, Discussion]

Blood Magnesium, and the Interaction with Calcium, on the Risk of
                    High-Grade Prostate Cancer. Background Ionized calcium (Ca) and magnesium (Mg) compete as essential messengers to                         regulate cell proliferation and inflammation. We hypothesized that                         inadequate Mg levels, perhaps relative to Ca levels (e.g. a high Ca/Mg                         ratio) are associated with greater prostate cancer risk.   Study Design In this biomarker sub-study of the Nashville Men's Health Study (NMHS),                         we included 494 NMHS participants, consisting of 98 high-grade                         (Gleason>=7) and 100 low-grade cancer cases, 133 prostate intraepithelial                         neoplasia (PIN) cases, and 163 controls without cancer or PIN at biopsy.                         Linear and logistic regression were used to determine associations between                         blood Ca, Mg, and the Ca/Mg ratio across controls and case groups while                         adjusting for potential confounding factors.   Results Serum Mg levels were significantly lower, while the Ca/Mg ratio was                         significantly higher, among high-grade cases vs. controls                         (p = 0.04, p = 0.01,                         respectively). Elevated Mg was significantly associated with a lower risk of                         high-grade prostate cancer (OR = 0.26 (0.09, 0.85)). An                         elevated Ca/Mg ratio was also associated with an increased risk of                         high-grade prostate cancer (OR = 2.81 (1.24, 6.36)                         adjusted for serum Ca and Mg). In contrast, blood Ca levels were not                         significantly associated with prostate cancer or PIN.Mg, Ca, or Ca/Mg levels                         were not associated with low-grade cancer, PIN, PSA levels, prostate volume,                         or BPH treatment.   Conclusion Low blood Mg levels and a high Ca/Mg ratio were significantly associated with                         high-grade prostate cancer. These findings suggest Mg affects prostate                         cancer risk perhaps through interacting with Ca.

Introduction
Prostate cancer is the most common non-cutaneous malignancy in Western societies and
                the second leading cause of cancer death in men [1]. A number of prospective studies
                have investigated the relationship between calcium and overall prostate cancer risk,
                with decidedly mixed results [2]-[6]. Several studies also investigating the relationship
                between calcium intake and the risk of aggressive or clinically relevant prostate
                cancers have generated both null [4], [6] and positive results [7]-[13]. In contrast, two recent
                studies found higher serum calcium levels associated with aggressive lesions or
                fatal prostate cancer [14], [15]. Blood calcium levels are tightly regulated, and only
                moderately affected by dietary intake of calcium and absorption rate [16]. Thus, one
                possible explanation for the inconsistencies across study populations is that
                dietary intake measures of calcium may not accurately reflect the blood calcium
                concentration to which prostate tissue is exposed.
Magnesium is the second most abundant intracellular cation in the body, involved with
                over 300 biological activities [17], and calcium and magnesium levels in the body are jointly
                regulated through a negative feedback system [16], and through competition for
                intestinal absorption and renal reabsorption [18]. Calcium and magnesium also
                compete for membrane binding sites within the cell, and previous in
                    vitro and in vivo studies indicate that magnesium
                inhibits calcium activity or that magnesium deficiency enhances the physiologic
                effects of calcium [17], [19], [20].
The 1999-2000 National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey found 79%
                of U.S. adults have a magnesium intake below the Recommended Dietary Allowance [21]. Magnesium
                deficiency in Western societies has been linked to insulin resistance [22], [23], type II
                diabetes [24],
                    [25],
                metabolic syndrome [26], coronary heart disease [27], colorectal cancer [28], and
                colorectal adenoma [29]. Similar to the relationships between obesity and most
                chronic diseases, systemic inflammation may be a unifying pathway by which magnesium
                deficiency contributes to such a broad range of morbidity [19], [30]. Chronic inflammation may also
                play a key role in the progression from normal tissue to prostatic intraepithelial
                neoplasia (PIN) and prostate cancer [31], and it is also possible that
                the elevated inflammatory response associated with magnesium deficiency is dependent
                on concurrent calcium levels [19].
The purpose of this study is to investigate the association between serum magnesium
                with prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN), low-grade prostate cancer, and
                high-grade prostate cancer. We further investigated the interaction between
                magnesium and calcium levels on aggressive or high-grade prostate cancer risk,
                hypothesizing that inadequate serum magnesium levels reflected by a high serum ratio
                of calcium to magnesium will be associated with more aggressive prostate cancer.

Materials and Methods
Study Population
The Nashville Men's Health Study (NMHS) utilizes a multi-centered,
                    rapid-recruitment protocol to collect clinical, biological, behavioral, and body
                    measurement data from men scheduled for diagnostic prostate biopsy. All
                    participants provided written informed consent in accordance with the Vanderbilt
                    University IRB. Men scheduled for a diagnostic prostate biopsy between 2002 and
                    2008 at a Vanderbilt University Medical Center (Nashville, TN), the Tennessee
                    Valley Veteran's Administration Hospital (Nashville, TN), or a large
                    private urology practice in Nashville, were approached for recruitment. Eligible
                    participants were 40 years of age or older and had no prior prostate cancer
                    diagnosis. Approximately 95% of eligible men approached for recruitment
                    agree to participate, and the study population included 2,100 eligible
                    consenting subjects. Pathology data were analyzed from two labs, but over
                    90% of patients were diagnosed at a large community urologic partnership
                    with one on-site pathologist. We have compared in a sub-sample of 60 men
                    pathology scoring at biopsy from pathology after gland removal (the definitive
                    staging) and found similar biopsy Gleason score categories.
Biomarker Sub-Study
In 2009, a sub-study of 503 NMHS participants was developed for translational
                    investigations of promising biomarkers hypothesized to be associated with
                    prostate cancer risk. We included all 137 available PIN cases available to us at
                    that time through recruitment, and PIN cases served as the age index for
                    frequency matching. We then randomly selected from our available recruitment 101
                    high-grade prostate cancer cases (Gleason = 7(4+3
                    only), 8, 9, or 10) and 100 low-grade prostate cancer cases
                    (Gleason = 6) such that the PIN, low-grade, and high-grade
                    cases had an age distribution between 50-80 years and had a similar age
                    distribution using 5-year age categories. We also randomly selected 165
                    biopsy-negative controls using identical age criteria from approximately 900
                    candidates, although we oversampled controls less than age 55 through random
                    selection to support the analysis of younger men with fewer cancer outcomes.
Data Collection
Measures of body size and weight were collected by a trained research staff
                    member at the time of recruitment. Participants wore a hospital gown or other
                    light clothing, and did not wear shoes. Chart review included age, race, PSA
                    history, and prostate needle-biopsy result (cancer, PIN, negative, or a
                    suspicious, atypical, or other lesion). Gleason scores at biopsy were also
                    ascertained for subjects diagnosed with cancer following pathology review of the
                    biopsy specimen. Prostate volume (cm3) was measured by transrectal
                    ultrasound (TRUS) during the prostate biopsy procedure. Family history of
                    prostate cancer was ascertained from the surgical chart and by a structured
                    research questionnaire administered to each participant upon recruitment.
As a part of the pre-biopsy clinic visit, all NMHS participants are instructed to
                    make a list of all current medications at home or to bring their medications to
                    this clinic visit. Prior to biopsy, the surgeon reviews all survey responses
                    with the participant to confirm that the subject has been taking the listed
                    drugs. Additionally, the surgeon makes specific queries to the subject for drugs
                    such as aspirin or Warfarin that might affect bleeding or clotting during the
                    biopsy procedure. All prescription and non-prescription drugs were abstracted
                    from the medical record following consent from the participant. Drug categories
                    were developed to represent men receiving treatment for cardiovascular disease,
                    diabetes, BPH, or taking a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agent. Drugs
                    formulated as a combination of two or more active drugs were classified by each
                    of the component drugs.
Biomarker Assays
Serum concentration of magnesium and calcium were determined by standard analytic
                    method on the Beckman DXC 800 chemistry analyzer provided by the Vanderbilt
                    Pathology Laboratory Services with an intra-assay coefficient of variation of
                    2.0. Several biomarkers associated with obesity were also analyzed. All study
                    biomarker assays include a standard set of blank and positive controls and were
                    performed in a single batch and blind to case-control status.
Data Analysis
Among 503 participants, we dropped these participants (1 high-grade cancer, 1
                    PIN, 1 control) for missing magnesium levels; (1 control, 1 low-grade cancer, 1
                    PIN) for missing calcium levels; and (1 PIN, 1 high-grade cancer) for missing
                    both Mg and Ca. We also dropped 1 PIN case with severe hypocalcemia (2.5 ng/ml).
                    Thus, the final analytic study population included 494 participants (99
                    high-grade cancer and 99 low-grade cancer, 133 PIN, and 163 negatives). Analyses
                    that controlled for WHR were limited to 493 participants with WHR.
The current molecular sub-study was independently funded to test our a
                        priori hypothesis, as stated from our grant, that low serum
                    magnesium levels are associated with increased risk of PIN and prostate cancer,
                    perhaps more so among men with elevated calcium levels. Thus, our primary
                    analyses investigated the associations between serum magnesium and
                    calcium/magnesium ratio and risk of PIN and prostate cancer, whereas all other
                    analyses were conducted to support the primary analysis or to explore nature of
                    our primary findings. Because we also proposed the direction of the association
                    in the a priori hypothesis, one-sided tests were performed for
                    primary hypotheses.
Prior to testing our primary hypothesis, preliminary analyses compared mean
                    magnesium and calcium levels across age categories, demographics, obesity
                    measures, PSA levels, prostate volume, NSAID use, treatment for BPH, CVD,
                    hypercholesterolemia, or diabetes. The distributions of magnesium, calcium, and
                    the ratio of calcium to magnesium ratio (Ca/Mg) were approximately normally
                    distributed and therefore were not transformed for analysis. Our primary
                    analyses compared mean magnesium and calcium levels between cancer, PIN, and
                    control groups. We report mean values adjusted for WHR, diabetes treatment, CVD
                    treatment, and race in a linear model after finding that these factors were
                    significantly associated with either calcium or magnesium levels, orCa/Mg
                    (p<0.05). We also adjusted for age to accommodate potential residual
                    confounding not addressed through the frequency matching of cases and controls
                    for the biomarker sub-study. Logistic regression was used to calculate odds
                    ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals summarizing the association
                    between magnesium, calcium, or Ca/Mg with each case outcome in separate models
                    adjusting for age or for age, WHR, race, and treatment for diabetes and CVD.
                    Magnesium, calcium, and Ca/Mg were scaled as continuous variables or categorized
                    at tertiles of the control-group distribution. Tests for interaction were
                    determined by cross-product term between magnesium or calcium and the covariates
                    of interest in the presence of each main-effect and other covariates.

Results
Controls, PIN cases, and cancer cases had similar distributions for age, race, and
                family history of prostate cancer (Table 1). Serum levels of magnesium, calcium, and Ca/Mg
                averaged 2.14 ng/ml, 9.72 ng/ml, and 4.58, respectively. Magnesium levels were not
                significantly correlated with calcium levels overall
                (r = -0.06, p = 0.17), or within
                controls (r = 0.06, 0.48), or low-grade
                (r = -0.05, p = 0.62) or high-grade
                (r = -0.07, 0.52) cancer cases.There was a significant
                but weak inverse correlation between magnesium and calcium levels among PIN cases (r
                 = -0.20, p = 0.02).
Magnesium levels were significantly lower among non-white participants, as well as
                participants being treated for diabetes or CVD (Table 2). However, only 16 non-white
                subjects were being treated for diabetes. Calcium and the Ca/Mg were also
                significantly associated with treatment for diabetes, and the Ca/Mg ratio was
                significantly lower among whites compared to non-whites. Furthermore, serum calcium
                and the Ca/Mg ratio were significantly higher with a higher WHR. In contrast,
                magnesium, calcium, and Ca/Mg were not significantly associated with current use of
                steroid reductase inhibitors and/or alpha blockers, PSA levels, prostate size, BMI,
                or other factors considered. Thus, final analytic models did not adjust for current
                use of steroid reductase inhibitors and/or alpha blockers, PSA and prostate size,
                BMI, or volume.
Magnesium levels were approximately 5% lower among high-grade cancer cases
                compared to controls (p = 0.04) or PIN cases
                (p = 0.03) after adjusting for age, WHR, race, and treatment
                for diabetes and CVD (Table
                        3). Accordingly, the Ca/Mg ratio was significantly higher
                among high-grade cases compared to controls (p = 0.01) and PIN
                cases (p = 0.05). The Ca/Mg ratio was also higher among
                high-grade cancer cases compared to low-grade cases (p = 0.05).
                In contrast, serum calcium levels were somewhat higher among high-grade prostate
                cancer cases, but differences in calcium levels between groups were not
                statistically significant.
Similarly, increasing magnesium levels were associated with a lower likelihood of
                being diagnosed with high-grade prostate cancer. For example, magnesium levels in
                the highest tertile were associated with an approximate 48% reduction in risk
                (OR = 0.52, (0.26, 1.02; p-trend = 0.04).
                This association became stronger after additional control for calcium
                (OR = 0.48 (0.24-0.96;
                p-trend = 0.03) (Table 4). While high-grade cancer was not associated
                with calcium levels, the Ca/Mg ratio was associated with an increasing trend for
                greater risk of high-grade prostate cancer. Furthermore, Ca/Mg as a continuous
                variable was significantly associated with high-grade disease
                (OR = 2.81 (1.24, 6.36), adjusted for magnesium, calcium, and
                other covariates). Table
                        5 summarizes the relationship between magnesium levels and
                high-grade disease across calcium levels, and suggests that higher magnesium levels
                may lower the risk of high-grade prostate cancer among men with high calcium levels
                (OR = 0.48 (0.23, 1.00)).

Discussion
We found serum magnesium levels, and the ratio of calcium-to-magnesium (Ca/Mg), was
                significantly associated with high-grade prostate cancer. Calcium levels alone, in
                contrast, were not consistently associated with prostate cancer or PIN. Our analyses
                also suggested that increased blood magnesium levels have an effect that may be at
                least partially dependent on calcium levels toward the pathogenesis for high-grade
                prostate cancer.
Calcium has long held an interest in cancer with essential messenger roles regulating
                cell cycle proliferation and apoptosis [32]-[34]. Calcium consumption might
                also reduce the production of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D (1,25(OH)2D; calcitriol), the
                hormonal form of vitamin D [35]. However, studies of dietary calcium intake in relation
                to aggressive prostate cancer have produced mixed results [2], with little evidence of an
                association in the Melbourne Collaborative Cohort Study [6], the Calcium Polyp Prevention
                Study [3], the
                Prostate, Lung, Colorectal and Ovarian Cancer Screening Trial [4], or a recent prospective analysis
                of blood calcium levels [5]. In contrast, several prospective studies have suggested
                that greater intake of calcium [2] or a higher level of serum calcium [14], [15] is associated with aggressive,
                poorly differentiated, lesions or fatal prostate cancer. Our analysis may be the
                first to suggest that the relationship between calcium and prostate cancer depends,
                at least to some degree, on the counter-effects of magnesium, and provides one
                possible explanation for some inconsistency in the previous studies.
Magnesium plays an essential role in DNA repair, cell differentiation and
                proliferation, apoptosis, and angiogenesis [17], [19], [36]. Magnesium deficiency is also
                linked to the inflammatory response [19] and oxidative stress [37], while magnesium
                supplementation, in contrast, improves insulin sensitivity and reduces insulin
                levels [23]
[22]. Given the
                broad range of biological functions dependent on magnesium, it is highly plausible
                that magnesium deficiency may affect multiple pathways toward tumorigenesis across
                the body. For example, a recent study found mice transplanted with Lewis Lung
                Carcinoma and receiving a low-Mg diet had a significant 70% reduction in
                primary tumor growth, but also had a higher metastatic potential [38].
                Interestingly, we found low serum Mg was only associated with an increased risk of
                high-grade prostate cancer, but not PIN or low-grade prostate cancer, perhaps
                consistent with the higher metastatic potential found in the prior animal studies.
                Magnesium acts as a physiologic antagonist to ionized calcium [17], and a low ionized magnesium
                level may further potentate the activity of ionized calcium [17]. We found the Ca/Mg ratio was
                associated with high grade prostate cancer after adjusting for magnesium and calcium
                levels, and there was a somewhat stronger, although not significantly stronger,
                association between magnesium and high-grade prostate cancer among men with higher
                serum calcium.
Thus, our data suggest that magnesium levels may influence the progression of
                prostate lesions to a higher grade. Migration studies further reveal a substantial
                increase in the incidence of advanced prostate cancer as men move from Eastern Asia
                to the West [29],
                    [39], while
                the age-specific prevalence of indolent and early-stage prostate cancer lesions
                detected at autopsy are relatively uniform across countries [40]. Magnesium intake is similar
                between the East and West, however the ratio of dietary calcium to magnesium intake
                is much higher (2.8) in the US population than (1.6) in East Asia [29], perhaps
                contributing to international differences in prostate cancer risk described above,
                as well as colorectal cancer risk [29]. We found previously that the calcium/magnesium intake
                ratio modified the association between calcium intake and magnesium intake on the
                risk of colorectal adenoma [29]. Similarly, we found in our current prostate cancer study
                that African Americans had a significantly higher Ca/Mg serum ratio than whites, and
                our findings provide a possible underlying mechanism for the racial disparity in
                fatal prostate cancer.
There are several strengths to this analysis, including the opportunity to evaluate
                the potential for detection biases related to differences in PSA,prostate volume.
                Blood was collected prior to diagnosis and treatment, and body size measures were
                ascertained by trained staff. One concern is that the temporal relationship between
                magnesium, or the calcium/magnesium ratio, and carcinogenesis cannot be conclusively
                determined. Although we cannot exclude the possibility that the alterations in
                levels of magnesium and calcium are an effect rather than a cause of prostate
                cancer, previous animal studies suggest that our associations are not an effect of
                prostate cancer. Furthermore, prior studies in humans found lower levels of
                magnesium (thus, higher serum calcium/magnesium ratio) lead to inflammation and
                insulin resistance which have been linked to progression of prostate cancer. In our
                study, we only found significant differences between negative controls with
                high-grade cancer, but not PIN or low-grade cancer. This argues that lower levels of
                magnesium (or high calcium/magnesium ratio) are not simply a consequence of cancer,
                but does not remove the possibility that high-grade cancer in some way affects blood
                Mg levels. There is a somewhat higher probability that high-grade prostate cancer
                has metastasized to the bone, and bone provides a repository for circulating calcium
                and magnesium. However, clinical chart review from 189 prostate cancer cases from
                this study found that no evidence of metastatic disease or lymph node involvement at
                diagnosis. Nevertheless, prospective studies are warranted to confirm our novel
                findings. Although men with prior BPH surgery were not eligible for this analysis
                and we found no association between current BPH treatment with Mg or Ca, we cannot
                eliminate the possibility that a presumably small number of past finasteride user
                affected our results. The difference in Ca/Mg serum ratio between whites and African
                Americans needs to be interpreted with caution because this was a secondary
                analysisbased on only 50 African American participants.
Our finding indicates that higher blood magnesium levels are associated with a lower
                risk of high-grade prostate cancer. The lower ratio of calcium to magnesium was also
                associated with high-grade prostate cancer, suggesting the interaction between
                magnesium and calcium plays a role in the pathogenesis and progression of this
                disease to a more clinically relevant phase. These findings, if confirmed, may
                provide a new avenue for the personalized prevention or adjuvant care of prostate
                cancer.
