[Abstract, Results, Discussion, Methods, Mixed]

?1 integrin deletion enhances progression of prostate cancer in the TRAMP mouse model. b1 integrin regulates the response of both normal and cancer cells to their local environment. Although mis-localised in prostate cancer, the role b1 integrin plays in prostate development and carcinogenesis remains unknown. To assess the role of b1 integrin in vivo, we conditionally deleted b1 integrin from prostate epithelium and subsequently crossed these mice to the TRAMP prostate carcinogenesis model. Deletion of b1 integrin following castration and subsequent androgen supplementation resulted in an expansion of the p63-positive basal cell population and decreased differentiation. Consistent with these findings, deletion of b1 integrin in TRAMP mice decreased animal survival, decreased retention of normal prostate morphology, increased the percentage of tissue with poorly differentiated carcinoma, and increased cell proliferation. This study demonstrates that b1 integrin regulates several aspects of normal prostate development and in contrast to its role in several other tissues, its loss is associated with increased rates of prostate tumour progression.

Results
Deletion of b1 integrin in prostate epithelium
Prostate epithelial specific b1 integrin null mice were generated by crossing Itgb1fl/fl18 mice to ARR2PBi-Cre (Cre)17 transgenic mice. The specificity of Cre-mediated recombination was determined using PCR analysis, and showed that DNA from wild-type mice Itgb1fl/fl;Cre+/+ (Itgb1fl/fl;WT) yields only the 280 bp product from the floxed allele, whereas Itgb1fl/fl;Cretg/+ (Itgb1fl/fl;Cre) animals also yield a recombination product of approximately 300 bp, in addition to the Cre-transgene product (100 bp) (Figure 1a). Immuno-histochemical analyses of wild-type prostatic tissue shows the expected baso-lateral staining of epithelial cells (arrows), as well as expression in the stroma (Figure 1b). Examination of b1 integrin protein by immuno-histochemistry in Itgb1fl/fl;WT and Itgb1fl/fl;Cre animals reveal specific ablation of b1 integrin expression in the luminal epithelial cells, but b1 integrin retention within the stromal tissue in Cre-expressing animals (Figures 1c and d). This is consistent with the presence of Cre staining within the epithelial cells, but not the stroma (Figures 1e and f).
b1 integrin regulates the basal epithelial cell population during castration/ testosterone-driven development
Expression of ARR2PBi-Cre is strongest post-puberty, as a result of the androgen-b1 integrin plays in normal prostate tissue maintenance, we examined ventral, lateral, and dorsal prostate lobes at 9, 26 (Figure 2a), and 60 weeks of age, using H&E staining. These analyses reveal no gross morphological differences between the two genotypes, indicating no essential requirement for b1 integrin in post-pubertal prostate development, nor in prostate tissue maintenance.
We next used castration and subsequent testosterone supplementation (Figure 2b) as a means to recapitulate the programme of growth and differentiation that usually occurs during development, in the absence of b1 integrin. No differences in the masses of the prostate lobes between Itgb1fl/fl;WT and Itgb1fl/fl;Cre animals (data not shown), nor gross morphological alterations between the two genotypes (see Supplementary Fig. 1 online) were observed. However, histological analysis revealed an apparent increase in the number of cells with an epithelial basal morphology in Itgb1fl/fl;Cre mice. p63 is a marker of the basal cell population19202122, and IHC staining for p63 (Figure 2c, arrowhead) and subsequent quantification (Figure 2d) revealed an increase in the percentage of p63-stained epithelial cells/acinus (22.14+-0.91 vs 13.6+-0.65, p<0.0001, Figure 2d) in mice lacking b1 integrin compared to control mice.
The basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor, Mist1, has been proposed to regulate serous exocrine cell differentiation23. IHC using an antibody against Mist1 showed that the majority of luminal epithelial cells in Itgb1fl/fl;WT animals were positive for Mist1 expression (Figure 2e, arrows), whereas Itgb1fl/fl;Cre tissue reveals a significant number of cells with low or absent expression (34.01+-2.03% and 4.51+-0.70% versus 46.55+-1.63% and 22.11+-2.86%, Itgb1fl/fl;Cre and Itgb1fl/fl;WT, respectively; Figure 2e, arrowheads; and quantified in Figure 2f), indicating that loss of b1 integrin alters prostate epithelial cell populations and results in a reduction in the number of differentiated luminal epithelial cells.
Expression of b1 integrin during prostate carcinogenesis in TRAMP mice parallels b1 integrin expression in human prostate cancer
b1 integrin has been identified in a number of studies as being both mis-localised and up-regulated in expression during prostate cancer progression1013. To investigate the role that this protein plays in prostate cancer and the validity of utilising the TRAMP model with respect to b1 integrin function during prostate carcinogenesis, we examined b1 integrin protein levels during prostate cancer progression in TRAMP mice. Prostates were dissected out, and one half paraffin-embedded, the other half lysed for protein. Using H&E analyses to grade the prostate tumour morphology, protein was extracted from the corresponding half and subjected to western analysis. Consistent with the previous observations of Goel and colleagues24, b1 integrin was expressed in normal mouse prostate (Figure 1b), with protein levels increasing during the progression from prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia into well-differentiated carcinoma. However, as the tumour progresses, and becomes poorly differentiated (poorly-differentiated carcinoma), b1 integrin expression is lost (24 and see Supplementary Fig. 2 online)
Loss of b1 integrin in the TRAMP prostate cancer model decreases animal survival
To investigate the role of b1 integrin in prostate cancer progression, Itgb1fl/fl;WT and Itgb1fl/fl;Cre mice were crossed to TRAMPtg/+ mice14. Longitudinal survival analysis studies were performed. Kaplan-Meier analysis revealed that loss of b1 integrin in this mouse model of prostate cancer resulted in a small decrease in survival (Figure 3a; p = 0.05), with a median survival time of 191.5 vs. 181.0 days (TRAMPtg/+;Itgb1fl/fl;WT (n = 20) versus TRAMPtg/+;Itgb1fl/fl;Cre (n = 36)). No difference in the occurrence of lung, liver, or peri-aortic lymph node, metastases, upon visual inspection was observed between the genotypes (data not shown).
Loss of b1 integrin results in earlier, more aggressive tumours
To further characterise the effect of deleting b1 integrin in TRAMP-mediated prostate carcinogenesis, we performed a cross-sectional analysis. Prostate lobes were collected, paraffin-embedded, and histological examination performed using H&E staining. Tissue was graded according to Gingrich et al.,15. We first scored the percentage of mice within the cohort presenting with a particular pathology (ie normal, PIN, WDC, PDC) regardless of the percentage of the gland occupied by the pathology/lesion. At 15 weeks, the ventral prostates of all of the TRAMPtg/+;Itgb1fl/fl;WT mice retained at least some normal-appearing prostate epithelium, whereas only 50% of TRAMPtg/+;Itgb1fl/fl;Cre mice retained regions of normal prostate tissue (Figure 3b(i)). Within the same cohort of animals, 37.5% of the TRAMPtg/+;Itgb1fl/fl;Cre mice had progressed to PDC, (Figure 3b(i)) in the lateral prostate, a pathology not observed in the lateral prostates of TRAMPtg/+;Itgb1fl/fl;WT mice (Figure 3c).
We next scored the percentage of the prostate containing a particular pathology. The percentage of the glands occupied by normal-appearing prostate tissue was decreased in both the ventral (9.4+-6% TRAMPtg/+;Itgb1fl/fl;Cre vs 30.6+-6.6% TRAMPtg/+;Itgb1fl/fl;WT p = 0.0141 and lateral (1.3+-1% TRAMPtg/+;Itgb1fl/fl;Cre vs 11.9+-4.6% TRAMPtg/+;Itgb1fl/fl;WT p = 0.0206) prostate of TRAMPtg/+;Itgb1fl/fl;Cre animals compared to controls (Figure 3b(ii)). In addition, 26.3+-15.6% and 30.6+-15.8% of the TRAMPtg/+;Itgb1fl/fl;Cre ventral and lateral prostates respectively were scored as PDC compared to 6.3+-5% in the ventral and not present in the lateral prostates of TRAMPtg/+;Itgb1fl/fl;WT mice. These data indicate that the decreased average survival time observed in b1 integrin null mice is, presumably due to the increased proportion of tissue with higher grade lesion.
Deletion of b1 integrin increases prostate epithelial cell proliferation
b1 integrin deletion has been shown to suppress cell proliferation in two mouse mammary tumourigenesis models46 subsequently resulting in impaired tumourigenesis. Decreased survival times and an enhancement in progression of pathological grade following loss of b1 integrin in the prostate prompted an examination of the proliferative status of these tumours. Quantification of Ki67 expression levels by IHC (representative images of Ki67 staining are shown in Figure 3f), demonstrated a consistent increase in cell proliferation in TRAMPtg/+;Itgb1fl/fl;Cre prostates relative to controls at 15 (data not shown) and 18 weeks (28.2+-7.7% TRAMPtg/+;Itgb1fl/fl;Cre vs 18.4+-2.4% TRAMPtg/+;Itgb1fl/fl;WT p = 0.0613) (Figure 3d), consistent with the increased tumour progression observed in our cross-sectional and survival analysis.

Discussion
We have detailed herein the first conditional deletion of b1 integrin from mouse prostate epithelium, allowing us to investigate the role of this extra-cellular matrix receptor in the context of the signalling and extra-cellular environment of the prostate during development, in tissue maintenance, and utilised the TRAMP model to gain insight into its role in prostate cancer.
b1 integrin has been shown to play an essential role in the regulation of cell phenotype and function in a number of different systems (reviewed in25) including mammary gland, where conditional deletion has demonstrated a critical role for b1 integrin in maintaining the structural integrity of alveoli and regulating epithelial cell proliferation and differentiation during glandular development2627. In contrast to these tissues, histological analyses of animals lacking expression of b1 integrin in prostate epithelium reveal no requirement for the receptor in normal tissue maintenance, possibly indicating functional compensation from other b integrins expressed in prostate epithelium (reviewed by Goel and colleagues28), or that b1 integrin is functionally redundant once an appropriate basal lamina has formed in development.
To further test the requirement of b1 integrin in the prostate, we used castration and subsequent androgen supplementation, to force prostate regeneration and remodeling in the absence of b1 integrin. The defect in differentiation observed is consistent with studies implicating b1 integrin as required for terminal differentiation. The role of b1 integrin in keratinocyte differentiation has been extensively studied, revealing that reduction of b1 integrin is required to both reduce adhesion to the basement membrane, and in turn, initiate differentiation29. This has been further dissected to show that adhesion to extra-cellular matrix proteins suppresses terminal differentiation3031. Studies performed by Bagutti and colleagues32 indicate that b1 integrin is required to enhance sensitivity of keratinocytes to factors secreted by dermal fibroblasts, such as Keratinocyte Growth Factor (KGF or FGF7), indirectly demonstrating an interaction between b1 integrin and the KGF receptor (FGFR2IIIb). KGF and b1 integrin have also been shown to act in concert to regulate differentiation of primary human prostate epithelial cells in culture12. KGF is a paracrine regulator of ductal growth and branching morphogenesis of the developing prostate33, and treatment of primary human prostate epithelial cells with KGF induces both a decrease in a2b1 integrin expression, as well as an increase in the proportion of cells expressing prostate epithelial differentiation markers. This differentiation effect is restricted to the CD133- population, thought to represent the transit amplifying cells, thus enabling the prostate to continue to produce both a differentiated epithelial compartment, as well as maintain the (CD133+) stem cell population. The increase in p63-positive basal epithelial cells observed in our Itgb1fl/fl;Cre animals after castration and testosterone supplementation may be indicative of a temporary increase in proliferation (although no differences in Ki67 were observed (data not shown), similar to that observed with b1 integrin blockade by Heer and colleagues12) which, with sufficient exposure to paracrine factors such KGF, results in delayed, but not inhibited, differentiation, as evidenced by the decrease in Mist1 staining.
Utilising the TRAMP model of prostate carcinogenesis, increased percentages of higher tumour grades were observed in b1 integrin-deleted animals (Figure 3b), as were higher proliferative rates (Figure 3c). These alterations are of pathological relevance, resulting in a small decrease in median survival time, as indicated by Kaplan-Meier survival analysis (Figure 3a). Using a second mouse model of prostate cancer (in which PTEN is deleted from prostate epithelium34) to further investigate the role of b1 integrin, suggests that similar to the TRAMP model, deletion of b1 enhances progression of tumourigenesis (preliminary results; data not shown). This is in contrast to several studies performed using b1 integrin deletion in mouse tumourigenesis models, such as breast, in which loss of b1 results in a decrease in proliferation, a block of tumour induction6, or a decrease in metastatic potential4. However, it should be noted, that unlike in prostate cancer, where b1 integrin levels initially increase with loss of differentiation1013, b1 integrin levels decrease in breast cancer35, and that b1 integrin levels do not correlate with patient survival in breast cancer mRNA expression arrays36. b1 integrin also regulates normal mammary epithelial cell proliferation and morphology during mammopoiesis26, whereas we have demonstrated here that ablation of b1 integrin in the prostate has no effect on proliferation, or gland morphology, and a mild effect on differentiation following castration/androgen supplementation.
A number of factors complicate the study of individual integrins both in vitro and in vivo. Firstly, integrins are obligate heterodimers, requiring an alpha and a beta sub-unit. The functional redundancy of specific a/b heterodimers has been well characterised. In the mouse mammary gland, deletion of either a3 or a6, both partners of b1 integrin, has no effect on mammary gland development37, whereas deletion of b1 integrin, which results in ablation of both a3b1 and a6b1, has a significant mammary phenotype27. In addition, while complete deletion of b1 integrin inhibits tumour growth and metastasis, targeting of the a2b1 heterodimer has the opposite effects in breast cancer cells36, indicating both context and heterodimer specific roles for individual integrins. In prostate cancer, the likely b1 integrin heterodimers present are a2b1 and a6b1, given the aberrant expression of both a2 and a6 sub-units (reviewed in28), deletion of the b1 sub-unit is likely to have knock-on effects. The increase in tumour progression and cell proliferation observed in this study following b1 integrin deletion in the prostate, is consistent with a2b1 integrin being the dominant integrin heterodimer in the prostate.
Finally, b1 integrin also has a number of different isoforms, of which b1a and b1c have been reported in human prostate383940. The b1c isoforms however, are not present in the mouse genome4142. Differing in the cytoplasmic tail, and therefore altering binding partners, experiments performed in prostate cell lines indicate opposing roles for these isoforms, inducing and inhibiting cellular proliferation, and decreasing and enhancing adhesion to the basement membrane, respectively2443444546. While the roles played by individual isoforms of b1 integrin have yet to be elucidated, our results indicate that b1 integrin acts to modulate proliferation in prostate cancer, with its loss resulting in enhanced tumour progression in the TRAMP mouse model. From work performed on human prostate cancer cell lines, Goel and colleagues44 have hypothesised that re-expression of the b1c integrin isoforms may be sufficient to revert a neoplastic phenotype to a non-proliferative and highly adherent phenotype. Our results presented here are consistent with the idea that human prostate tumour progression is driven not by increasing expression of b1a integrin, but rather, by the loss of b1c integrin.
We conclude that although previous studies have indicated a requirement for b1 integrin in tumour cell proliferation and differentiation, our studies in mouse prostate epithelium indicate that b1 integrin regulates epithelial cell specification and differentiation in normal prostate, and that deletion of b1 integrin in prostate cancer can result in enhanced tumourigenesis and proliferation. Therefore, therapeutic strategies aimed at inhibiting this receptor in prostate cancer may prove not to be beneficial, and that downstream pathways, such as those mediated by Integrin-linked kinase or Focal adhesion kinase, should be investigated.

Methods
Mouse strains and breeding
The animal experimentation described within this study was approved by the Garvan Institute and St Vincent's Hospital Animal Ethics Committee.
The Itgb1fl/fl, TRAMPtg/+, and ARR2PBi-Cre mice have been described previously141718. Animals were crossed as described in the relevant sections, and where possible, the Cre and TRAMP transgenes were carried by the female parent to avoid any potential issues with fertility.
Genotyping was performed for Itgb1fl/fl, TRAMPtg/+, and ARR2PBi-Cre, as outlined by the Jackson Laboratory. Recombination of the Itgb1fl/fl locus was confirmed as previously described47 using primers: b1-5 Forward 5'-CGCAGAACAATAGGTGCTGAAATTAC-3' and b1-3 Reverse 5'-CCACAACTTTCCCAGTTAGCTCTC-3' which are located either side of the loxP insertion sites. A 300 bp amplicon is produced when recombination has occurred.
Morphological, histological, and immuno-histochemical analyses
Lateral, ventral, dorsal, and anterior (coagulating gland) prostate lobes were removed from mice, and one of each lobe fixed in 10% buffered formalin for 4 hours, transferred to 70% ethanol overnight, before being embedded in paraffin (the remaining lobes were flash frozen with liquid nitrogen). Morphological analyses were performed by examination of 4 mm sections stained with haematoxylin and eosin (H&E). For immunohistochemical analysis, endogenous peroxidase activity was blocked using 3% hydrogen peroxide. Antibodies and the retrieval methods used were: b1 integrin, 1/20000 dilution (Millipore, Clone MB1.2) Dako s2367, pressure cooker retrieval; Mist1, (C. Pin, University of Western Ontario, Canada) 0.05% citraconic anhydride, pressure cooker retrieval; p63, 1/100 dilution (Dako Clone 4A4) 0.05% citraconic anhydride, pressure cooker retrieval; and Ki67, 1/100 dilution (Lab Vision Neomarkers, Clone SP6), Dako s1699, pressure cooker retrieval. Primary antibodies were detected using HRP-conjugated secondary antibody, and DAB detection. Sections were counter-stained with haemotoxylin.
Quantification of Ki67 and p63 was performed by taking either >6 random low magnification images, or images of >10 acini, respectively, and using ImageJ to count the stained and unstained epithelial cells.
Castration and testosterone supplementation
Five animals of each genotype (Itgb1fl/fl;WT and Itgb1fl/fl;Cre) were castrated at 15 weeks of age. Three weeks post-surgery, testosterone pellets (5 mg, 21 day release; Innovative Research of America) were implanted subcutaneously in the upper back of mice. Animals were sacrificed 2 weeks post-supplementation for analysis. A small number of castrated animals were sacrificed at 18 weeks to assess the extent of involution.
Survival and statistical analysis
For survival analyses, animals were sacrificed once tumour burden was either determined to reach 10% initial body weight, or cause distress to the animals (as dictated by the Garvan Animal Ethics guidelines, including hunched posture, poor coat condition, difficulty breathing, and failure to respond to stimuli), requiring euthanasia. For cross-sectional analyses, lateral, ventral, dorsal, and anterior prostate lobes were collected at 9, 12, 15, 18, and 24 weeks of age, with at least 8 animals of each genotype for each time point. Liver, lung, kidney, and peri-aortic lymph nodes were examined visually at necropsy for metastases.
Data, where indicated, are represented as mean+-SEM, and statistical analysis performed using Student's t-test and GraphPad Prism software. Kaplan-Meier survival analysis and the Mantel-Cox log-rank test were performed using GraphPad Prism software.

Supplementary Material
Supplementary Information
Supplementary Information
