[Abstract, Mixed, Mixed, Mixed, Mixed]

Proton beam therapy and localised prostate cancer: current status and
controversies. Proton therapy is a promising, but costly, treatment for prostate cancer. Theoretical physical advantages exist; yet to date, it has been shown only to be comparably safe and effective when compared with the alternatives and not necessarily superior. If clinically meaningful benefits do exist for patients, more rigorous study will be needed to detect them and society will require this to justify the investment of time and money. New technical advances in proton beam delivery coupled with shortened overall treatment times and declining device costs have the potential to make this a more cost-effective therapy in the years ahead.

The Physical Uncertainties
The physics of radiation therapy with a beam of proton particles has been well
established, and attractive radiation dose-distribution maps can be generated that show
highly conformal treatment delivery (Figure 2). Uncertainties
do, however, exist and some of these pertain to the treatment of deep-seated tumours such
as the prostate (Goitein, 2008). Although the beam can be
stopped in tissue sharply over the first 10 cm, at greater depths such as the depth
of the average prostate gland, there is 'end-of-range uncertainty', and a
penumbra develops laterally and around the distal end of the beam. This can blur the
beam's sharp edge, delivering higher doses of radiation than anticipated to adjacent
normal tissues. In addition, a proton beam is sensitive to tissue density and
heterogeneity and may be perturbed by passage through very inhomogeneous tissue, such as
bone, and then muscle of the pelvis. This becomes more of an issue if the bone is not
fully immobilised as can be the case with the hips due to anatomical variation in femur
angle (Trofimov et al, 2011). Similarly, targeting
of dose can be affected significantly when organs move over the course of therapy
(Wang et al, 2011). Protons may be associated
with less scatter dose the further you get away from the prostate (Yoon et al, 2010) and consequently some modelling studies have
reported lower rates of radiation-associated second cancers both in-field and out-of-field
(Fontenot et al., 2009). However, neutrons may
be produced and scattered from the heads of some types of proton treatment machines. The
high radiobiological effect of neutrons has the risk of causing more secondary cancers
than more conventional radiation treatment, thus potentially negating one of the putative
advantages of the therapy (Brenner and Hall, 2008; Athar et al, 2010). Although efforts are underway to
address some of the limitations associated with delivery of protons (Brenner et al, 2009; Tang et al,
2012), these physical uncertainties continue to generate much heated debate in
the radiation oncology literature and are yet to be fully settled.

The Clinical Evidence
The management of localised prostate cancer has been a subject of debate for over 30
years. Surgery has improved in quality and proliferated in technique (open, laparoscopic,
robotic assisted, and focal). Radiation therapy has done exactly the same (conventional
2-D, conformal 3-D, intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT), stereotactic, and high-
and low-dose brachytherapy). The majority of the radiation treatments for prostate cancer
delivered in the United States today are given either by IMRT, a method that uses
inhomogeneous photon beams of non-uniform intensity to sculpt around critical structures
like the rectum, or brachytherapy, a procedure that involves the implantation of
radioactive devices directly into the prostate. In addition, elegant modes of daily
immobilisation and localisation of the prostate using image-guided radiation therapy
techniques have been generally adopted. Of note, at this stage, modes of image guidance
(i.e., daily cone beam computed tomography or electromagnetic emitting transponders) are
generally more advanced (and in fact more costly) for IMRT than proton beam. Although many
studies have documented either increased rates of cancer eradication or better patient
quality of life with modern techniques delivering contemporary high doses of radiation
(Zelefsky et al, 2001; Sanda et al, 2008; Zietman et al,
2010a; Bekelman et al, 2011; Michalski et al, 2011), these have been rather modest
improvements and there has been sparse high-quality evidence supporting one technology
over another. Although, one randomised comparison did demonstrate a benefit to 2-D
vs 3-D (Dearnaley et al, 1999), in
general, there has been rapid and uncontrolled marketing, demand, dissemination, and
implementation of new and promising technologies (both hardware and software) before their
effectiveness and comparative value have been rigorously evaluated. The increased need for
cost-control inevitably will demand higher levels of evidence supporting clinical efficacy
and cost-effectiveness. The question remains whether or not proton beam with its current
high price tag brings added value.
Only one randomised trial exists comparing conventional radiation therapy with proton
beam, and this was initiated in the 1980s using older techniques and treating advanced
disease in the era before early detection with PSA (Shipley et
al, 1995). There was no difference in outcome between the two arms, but
this study is now of historical interest only. Several studies comparing the dosimetry of
proton beam with IMRT have been published and, depending upon the choice of beams and
planning systems, IMRT can be seen as theoretically a little better or a little worse than
protons (Trofimov et al, 2007; Vargas et al, 2008; Nihei et
al, 2011). Our own work suggests that the conformity of dose
distribution to the prostate may be better with IMRT. In the high-dose regions, IMRT shows
better sparing of the bladder and rectal sparing is similar, whereas in the low-dose
regions, proton beam achieves better sparing of both rectum and bladder (Trofimov et al, 2007). Thus, IMRT creates more of a
low-dose radiation 'bath' over a larger region of the pelvis and leads to a
higher, though still relatively small, whole-body radiation dose (Figure 2). This begs the question whether the worse morbidity of radiation
therapy comes from the high-dose area (sexual, rectal, and bladder functions) or the
cumulative low-dose areas (fatigue, bowel function, and second cancers). Dosimetric
studies showing relatively modest differences in physical dose distribution are of little
value without looking for measurable and meaningful differences in clinical outcome.
Although radiation oncologists have been eager to adopt proton beam for prostate cancer,
they have been slow to perform clinical studies. This is now being addressed. Recent
prospective clinical studies have documented certain truths about proton beam and prostate
cancer.
First, that radiation dose escalation to the prostate may be safely achieved. We have
shown that patient-reported quality of life is the same at doses of either 70 or
79 Gy when the boost dose is delivered by protons (Talcott
et al, 2010). This does not, however, address the fact that
escalation to the same doses may be achieved and be equally well tolerated by other
radiation techniques like IMRT or brachytherapy. That is to say that, despite the
theoretical physical advantages of proton therapy, studies have yet to show any clear
clinical benefit to proton beam over IMRT in terms of morbidity in the treatment of
prostate cancer. No direct head-to-head comparison between the two has yet been done,
although a multicenter randomised trial has recently been launched (discussed below).
Talcott et al (2010) did make comparisons
between two separate, though contemporary, cohorts of patients treated with proton beam or
either IMRT or 3-D conformal therapy and found no overt differences. The principal
concerns of patients, erectile dysfunction, voiding dysfunction, and rectal dysfunction,
appear to occur with similar acceptably low frequency. We have generated some preliminary
data suggesting transient differences in toxicity patterns with a potential early
short-term, though time-limited, improvement in bowel and urinary symptoms with PBT
vs IMRT (Gray et al, 2013). New data
from other US proton centers are also demonstrating excellent quality of life outcomes and
low rates of significant early gastrointestinal and genitourinary toxicity, with
proton-based therapy for prostate cancer, although these may come from the use of prostate
immobilisation and image guidance as much as from the use of proton beam (Mendenhall et al, 2012). Two other recent studies,
however, have suggested that PBT is associated with increased bowel toxicity compared with
IMRT (Kim et al, 2011; Sheets
et al, 2012). These studies rely on billing codes that may not
capture the patient's own experience and large databases that contain few PBT
patients and also lack data on treatment dose, margins, and other important relevant
clinical factors. As such, the validity of these conclusions remains a matter of debate.
It is also worth noting that the follow-up from all of these studies is too short to
capture all the late effects of radiation, which may continue to accumulate at 10 years or
beyond (Gardner et al, 2002).
Second, that cancer-control rates after proton beam are as good as those obtained with
any other kind of radiation therapy (Zietman et al,
2010a). Proton beam is certainly an effective addition to the armamentarium.
Although there are no completed randomised trials, there is one recent case-matched
comparison that shows identical cancer-control rates between proton beam and brachytherapy
(Coen et al, 2012). Given that there is no
evidence that proton beam is superior to other therapies in terms of prostate cancer
control, it might be an improved (and more costly) means to an unimproved end.
Third, that using current proton delivery methods (passively scattered beams), radiation
dose cannot be escalated significantly higher to achieve better cancer-control rates. A
prospective study performed at the MGH and Loma Linda Medical Centre concluded that
morbidity reaches the limits of acceptability at 82 Gy, with rectal bleeding
becoming a dose-limiting toxicity (Coen et al,
2011).

Cost and Usage
Although these data supporting the efficacy of PBT continue to emerge, much attention has
also focused on the cost of PBT relative to existing technologies. The number of centres
offering proton therapy in the United States is expected to double in the next 3 years
(Johnson, 2012), and prostate cancer patients may
represent up to 75% of the future consumers at these centres (Jarosek et al, 2011). An analysis using Markov models informed by
cost and efficacy data was conducted to compare the cost-effectiveness of 91.8 Gy
(RBE) delivered with proton beam to 81 Gy delivered with IMRT. It was assumed that
this 10 Gy dose escalation would result in a survival advantage without an increase
in toxicity, though this remains debatable as previously discussed (Coen et al, 2011). Despite this assumption, the incremental
cost-effectiveness ratio for PBT was calculated to be $63 578 per QALY for a
70-year-old man and $55 726 per QALY for a 60-year-old man. Using the
commonly accepted standard of $50 000 per quality-adjusted life year, PBT
did not appear to be cost-effective (Konski et al,
2007). Other economic reviews have found the lifetime cost for treatment,
follow-up, and management of recurrence and side effects to be $53 828 for
PBT, $37 861 for IMRT, $25 484 for brachytherapy,
$28 348 for radical prostatectomy, and $30 422 for active
surveillance (Ollendorf et al, 2009). The exact
degree of the incremental increase in cost for PBT over IMRT remains a subject of debate,
however. One recent study suggested the median amount reimbursed by the US Medicare
insurance program was $32 428 for PBT and $18 575 for IMRT
(Yu et al, 2013). There are clear ranges of
costs that are billed and reimbursed depending on provider and payer, and ways in which
cost is modelled, highlighting that pricing considerations remain a moving target, and
these will adapt and be fluid in the era of health-care payment reform.
Two future trends may, however, reduce the cost of proton beam delivery and make it a
more competitive option for patients. First, several randomised and other trials (Kupelian et al, 2007; Boike et
al, 2011; Arcangeli et al, 2012;
Dearnaley et al, 2012) have published early
results suggesting safety and equivalence between conventional fractionation and
hypo-fractionation (i.e., shorter treatment regimens that deliver fewer larger fractions
of radiation that may offer a therapeutic gain) in prostate cancer, and proton beam is
being investigated in this manner (Radiation Therapy Oncology Group protocol 0938). As the
cost of treatment delivery in the United States is proportional to the number of fractions
given, this alone may not only lead to cost savings but also better resource allocation
and increased patient convenience. Indeed, decreasing the total number of fractions
delivered from 44 to 28 or as few as 5, could result in a significant reduction in the
incremental cost difference of PBT. The second is that there is a natural trend towards
simplification and streamlining of any technology as it matures. New single gantry
facilities are being developed with a $15-25 million price tag. Although this
still remains costlier than most other medical technologies (for example a linear
accelerator capable of delivering IMRT may cost $1-5 million), the debt incurred
may be managed without requiring such high patient throughput and high treatment charges.
As further technical advances and operational efficiencies are employed, further lowering
of the cost gap between proton- and photon-based techniques will likely occur.

The Future
Proton beam therapy has not yet reached its full potential. The use of spot-scanned
delivery is being adopted, and this technique allows for greater intensity modulation
(Figure 2). Together with the use of more creative beam
angles, conformality should be taken to new heights (Trofimov et
al, 2007; Tang et al, 2012). It
remains debatable, however, whether or not this will translate into fewer side effects
and/or allow the delivery of higher doses to the prostate as most of the morbidity
comes from irradiation of the prostatic urethra, bladder neck, anterior rectum, and
nerves. These tissues are either within the prostate or immediately adjacent to it and are
unlikely to be significantly further spared without undertreating the prostate itself.
Focal or partial prostate therapy is being examined for very early cancers using focused
ultrasound or cryotherapy, and it is possible that intensity-modulated protons could have
a similar role. Alternatively, protons could be used to deliver partial prostate boosts in
the case of more advanced cancer (Figure 3).
If PBT were exactly the same cost as other forms of external radiation, there may be less
of a discussion. It would simply be regarded as another arrow in the quiver of radiation
options with potential theoretical benefits. It is, however, the powerful advocacy for its
superiority ahead of rigorous evidence that attracts suspicion. In this way, PBT is
illustrative of a broad problem in medicine generally. How can promising new and emerging
technologies that are rapidly evolving be evaluated in a rigorous and sufficiently timely
fashion such that creativity and innovation are not stifled? The vast majority of new
technologies are incremental advances of existing techniques that do not require testing
beyond that of basic safety as mandated by governmental regulatory bodies. Alternative
methodologies such as prospective observational registries (as has been done for PET
scanning and cardiac devices) may be employed to assess efficacy and appropriate
utilisation. For a few technologies, however, and proton beam is arguably one of them,
there has not been a simple incremental evolution but a gigantic revolution. It is here
that randomised controlled trials (RCTs) may still have a role, and the earlier they are
initiated the better (Zietman et al, 2010b). It
has been argued that the RCT remains crucial when: the new technology introduces a new
biology; when retraining or re-credentialing is required; when the technology is as likely
to be less effective as it is more effective than the alternatives; or when the technology
carries such a price that it will alter the resources available to care for others. Proton
beam meets several of these criteria. The relative radiobiological effectiveness is not
known with absolute accuracy for different tissues, and this may matter when ultra-high
doses are being delivered (Carabe-Fernandez et al,
2011). For this reason, and because of the differences in dose distribution
between protons and IMRT, there are circumstances where the outcome may be worse and not
necessarily better.
A RCT is, however, not necessary for every disease or every site to be treated by
protons. It is clear, for example, that there will be little advantage to treating
superficial skin cancers this way. Equally, there would be few willing to randomise
paediatric patients because the theoretical advantages of proton beam are so great and the
consequences of more conventional treatment so devastating that therapeutic equipoise, a
central requirement of any RCT, could not be assumed (Hellman and
Hellman, 1991). Furthermore, a RCT would be impractical for rare indications
(such as skull base chordomas) or when patients are unwilling to be randomised (van Loon et al, 2012). As such, RCTs should be reserved
for the 'grey zones', such as prostate cancer, where we need to document not
only efficacy and safety (done already) but to quantitate value added. Patients have
indicated their willingness to participate in such a trial for prostate cancer (Shah et al, 2012b). Several major US proton centers led
by the Massachusetts General Hospital and University of Pennsylvania have recently
launched a phase III randomised trial of IMRT vs PBT for localised low and
low-intermediate risk prostate cancer (http://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT01617161), with patient-reported
quality of life outcomes, as well as other clinical, physical, biological, and economic
end points (including assessing cost-effectiveness under current and future conditions for
alternative treatment delivery and pricing scenarios). Events are moving too fast, and the
answers this trial will provide cannot come too soon.
