[Abstract, Introduction, Methods, Results, Discussion, Mixed]

Upregulation of SATB1 Is Associated with Prostate Cancer Aggressiveness and Disease Progression. Disease aggressiveness remains a critical factor to the progression of prostate cancer. Transformation of epithelial cells to mesenchymal lineage, associated with the loss of E-cadherin, offers significant invasive potential and migration capability. Recently, Special AT-rich binding protein (SATB1) has been linked to tumor progression. SATB1 is a cell-type restricted nuclear protein, which functions as a tissue-specific organizer of DNA sequences during cellular differentiation. Our results demonstrate that SATB1 plays significant role in prostate tumor invasion and migration and its nuclear localization correlates with disease aggressiveness. Clinical specimen analysis showed that SATB1 was predominantly expressed in the nucleus of high-grade tumors compared to low-grade tumor and benign tissue. A progressive increase in the nuclear levels of SATB1 was observed in cancer tissues compared to benign specimens. Similarly, SATB1 protein levels were higher in a number of prostate cancer cells viz. HPV-CA-10, DU145, DUPro, PC-3, PC-3M, LNCaP and C4-2B, compared to non-tumorigenic PZ-HPV-7 cells. Nuclear expression of SATB1 was higher in biologically aggressive subclones of prostate cancer cells with their respective parental cell lines. Furthermore, ectopic SATB1 transfection conferred increased cell motility and invasiveness in immortalized human prostate epithelial PZ-HPV-7 cells which correlated with the loss of E-cadherin expression. Consequently, knockdown of SATB1 in highly aggressive human prostate cancer PC-3M cells inhibited invasiveness and tumor growth in vivo along with increase in E-cadherin protein expression. Our findings demonstrate that SATB1 has ability to promote prostate cancer aggressiveness through epithelial-mesenchymal transition.

Introduction
Prostate cancer is the second leading cause of cancer-related death among men in the United States, with nearly 33,720 deaths occurred in the year 2011 [1]. Poor prognosis of prostate cancer is associated with the aggressiveness of tumor cells which endows them with increased ability to intravasate into the vascular and lymphatic compartments, metastasize to distant sites, and cause recurrence even after definitive therapies like surgery and radiation [2], [3]. Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a key event in the tumor invasion process whereby epithelial cell-derived tumor acquires mesenchymal characteristics, lose their polarity and cell-cell contacts and undergo profound cytoskeleton remodeling [4]-[6]. The loss of E-cadherin expression is a hallmark of EMT [7], [8]. E-cadherin (CDH1) plays a central role in cell-cell adhesion junctions in maintenance of cell polarity and environment [7]. Loss of E-cadherin expression is commonly associated with tumor invasiveness, metastasis and poor prognosis in various human cancers including prostate cancer [8], [9]. Identification of proteins that cause molecular reprogramming of EMT could lead to their identification as prognostic biomarkers and therapeutic targets, thereby enabling the development of novel strategies to reduce prostate cancer aggressiveness.
Special AT-rich binding protein 1 (SATB1) is a transcription factor that functions as a genome organizer [10], [11]. It tends to bind with AT rich base unpaired sequences of the target gene [11]. SATB1 acquires a "3 D chickenwire" structure by forming anchor loops around chromatin, recruits chromatin remodeling complexes on the anchorage sites, and regulates histone modifications by rendering DNA sequences accessible or inaccessible for transcription [12], [13]. Transcription GenBank references two SATB mRNA transcript variants in humans: SATB1 and SATB2 [14]. Constitutive activation of SATB1 has been demonstrated primarily in cells of hematopoietic lineage and is involved in the stages of T cell development and differentiation controlling the expression of BCL-2 gene through the BCL-2 major breakpoint region (mbr) located within the 3'-UTR [15], [16]. SATB2 is implicated as a developmental regulator of neuronal differentiation [17]. Recent studies have shown aberrant expression of SATB1 in a variety of epithelial cancers, including melanoma, laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma, and carcinomas of the breast, colon, lung, ovary, and liver [18]-[24]. Overexpression of SATB1 has been identified as an independent prognostic marker for gastric cancer [25], and has been shown to play a role in breast tumor progression through a process of reprogramming gene expression and thereby promoting tumor growth and metastasis [26]. Little is known about the influence of SATB1 expression on the biologic behavior of prostate cancer.
Although SATB1 has been reported to be activated in various types of cancer, its role in cancer progression is not clear. A comprehensive gene expression analysis of clinical prostate cancer specimens revealed distinct transcriptional reprogramming associated with metastatic potential [27]. Functional profiling of genes suggested the association of SATB1 with chromatin modification impacting transcriptional regulation of genes regulating cell adhesion molecules and EMT [9], [12]. Given the significant role of EMT in prostate cancer invasiveness, it has been hypothesized that over-expression of SATB1 in prostate cancer might promote invasiveness of prostate cancer by downregulation of E-cadherin. Thus far, there have been no data on the role of SATB1 in prostate cancer. In this study of SATB1 expression, its nuclear and cytoplasmic localization was evaluated in a number of primary prostate cancer tissue specimens and established cell lines through a combination of immunohistochemistry and Western blotting. Our results demonstrate that nuclear presence of SATB1 significantly correlated with prostate cancer aggressiveness and disease progression. Consistent with clinical findings, ectopic alterations in SATB1 expression resulted in changes in cell motility and invasion both in vitro and in vivo. This line of evidence demonstrates the prognostic significance of SATB1 in prostate cancer and furthermore clarifies the influence of SATB1 in promoting prostate cancer invasiveness.

Materials and Methods
Cell Culture
Human prostate cancer cells, LNCaP, 22Rv1, DU145, PZ-HPV-7, CA-HPV-10 and PC-3 were purchased from the American Type Culture Collection (Manassas, VA). Human prostate cancer cells viz. PC-3M was provided by Dr. ME Kaighn at the National Cancer Institute [28]; C4-2B cells by Dr. Robert Sikes at the University of Delaware [29], and DUPro cells by Dr. Rajvir Dahiya at the University of California at San Francisco [30]. Earlier reports have documented the establishment of these cell lines [28]-[30]. The cells were cultured in RPMI-1640 medium with 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum, 100 ug/ml penicillin-streptomycin (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA), maintained in an incubator with a humidified atmosphere of 95% air and 5% CO2 at 37degC. The cultured cells were grown to ~60% confluence and lysates (total lysates, cytosolic and nuclear lysates) were prepared according to earlier protocol for further analysis.
Human Prostate Tissue Specimens and Immunohistochemistry
Samples of discarded human prostate tissue were received from the Tissue Procurement Facility of University Hospitals Case Medical Center and the Midwestern Division of the Cooperative Human Tissue Network. No consent was obtained for these discarded tissues per their hospital policies and Institutional Review Board protocols. These studies were approved by the Institutional Review Board at the University Hospitals Case Medical Center. Patients from whom these tissues were procured had undergone surgical procedures for prostatic disease and had not received any form of adjuvant therapy. The Gleason grade and score of adenocarcinoma in tissue specimens were assigned by a surgical pathologist experienced in genitourinary pathology. Immediately after procurement, samples were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80degC in the vapor phase of liquid nitrogen until further use. For IHC studies a human prostate tissue microarray (Cat# 73-5063) was procured from Zymed Laboratories (San Francisco, CA) including cores of normal prostate, benign hyperplastic prostate tissue, low-grade cancers and high-grade prostate cancers. In these specimens, immunohistochemical analysis was performed according to the manufacturer's protocol (Biocare Medicals, Concord, CA).
Transient Transfection
Androgen-refractory highly metastatic human prostate cancer PC-3M, which possess higher expression of SATB1, whereas, PZ-HPV-7 which has very low basal level of SATB1in the nucleus were used in the study. Briefly, these cells were plated in 100-mm plates and allowed to attach overnight. Approximately 70% confluent PZ-HPV-7 cells were transiently transfected with 8<mu>g of either pCMV6-AC True Clone Human plasmid DNA containing SATB1 (SC320672) expression was purchased from OriGene (Rockville, MD) or empty vector, whereas, PC-3M cells were infected with shRNA (SATB1) human plasmid DNA to knockdown the SATB1 gene expression; which contains pool of 3 target-specific lentiviral vector each encoding 19-25 nt (plus hairpin) (SC-36460-SH) and the empty vector shRNA plasmid-A (SC-108060) (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, CA) using Fugene 6 transfection reagent. After 6 h the medium was supplemented with serum culture medium, and the cells were incubated at 37degC in a humidified incubator for 48 h. Later, the cells were processed for immunoblot analysis as well as cell migration and invasion assays.
Western Blotting
Tumor lysates as well as cell lysates (total, cytosolic and nuclear) were prepared and subjected to immunoblot analysis. Protein (40<mu>g) from total cell lysates or human prostate tumor lysates was resolved over 4-20% SDS-PAGE and transferred to nitrocellulose membrane. After blocking with blocking buffer (PBS containing 0.1% Tween-20 and 10% FBS) for 2 h, the membrane was incubated with primary antibody for 2 h at room temperature. The antibodies used were SATB1 (Cat#ab49061, Abcam, Cambridge, MA); Histone H4 (Cat#07-108, Millipore, Denvers, MA); E-Cadherin (Cat#SC-8426); MMP-9 (Cat#SC-10737); <beta>-Actin (Cat#SC-47778) and Cytokeratin-18 (Cat#SC-6259) from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Santa Cruz, CA). The membrane was then incubated with HRP-conjugated secondary antibody for another 2 h at room temperature. The protein was detected by ECL substrate reagents (Amersham Biosciences, Arlington Heights, IL).
Cell Invasion Assay
Transiently transfect SATB1 in PZ-HPV-7 (SATB1over-expressing cells) and PC-3M infected (SATB1 knockdown cells) were taken in the study to examine the effect of SATB1 gene in the cell invasion as well as in migration. After 48 h of SATB1 gene infection in the cells, media containing serum was removed from the cells and was replenished fresh without serum RPMI medium for 6 h. Further cells were trypsinized, counted and plated into the transwells containing 1x106 cells/ml. The invasion chamber assay kit used was QCMTM ECMatrix Cell Invasion Assay, 24-well (8<mu>m) (Millipore Corporation, Denvers, MA, Cat#ECM550) based on the principle of the Boyden chamber. The collagen layer occludes the membrane pores, blocking non-invasive cells from migration through the membrane. Invasive cells, on the other hand, migrate through the polymerized collagen layer and cling to the bottom of the polycarbonate membrane. Invaded cells on the bottom of the insert membrane were incubated with Cell Stain solution, then subsequently extracted and detected on a standard microplate reader (560 nm). The whole procedure was followed according to the manufacturer's protocol.
Cell Migration Assay
Migration assay was performed in PZ-HPV-7 (SATB1over-expressing cells) and PC-3M infected (SATB1 knockdown cells) cells by using QCMTM, 24-well colorimetric cell migration assay kit (Millipore Corporation, Denvers, MA, Cat#ECM508) following vendor's protocol.
Reverse Transcription-polymerase Chain Reaction
Semi-quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) was performed to determine the transcript levels of SATB1 in human prostate tissue specimens of different Gleason grades and the amplification of GAPDH transcripts were used as the control to normalize the transcript levels of SATB1. Tissues were cut into small pieces and placed in Melt, a total nucleic acid isolation system (Ambion, Austin, TX), according to the manufacturers' protocol. RT was performed by using the oligo-dT primer (Invitrogen), and 0.5<mu>g total RNA in a 25<mu>l reaction mixture, containing 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.3), 75 mM KCl, 10 mM DTT, 5 mM MgCl2, 2.5 ml dNTP (10 mM), 10 U RNAsin, and 200 U MMLV reverse transcriptase (Invitrogen). The RT reaction was carried out at 39degC for 1 h to synthesize cDNAs. Then, PCR was performed to amplify cDNAs in a 25<mu>l reaction mixture containing 50 nmol of each gene specific primer, 3 ml RT product, 2.5 mM dNTP, 1X PCR buffer (5 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.3, 42.5 mM KCl, 0.1% Triton X-100), 0.5 ml Taq polymerase (Promega, Madison, WI) 2 mM MgCl2 along with primers used in the PCR reaction. The sequences of gene-specific primers for the SATB1 forward: 5'- GTGGAAGCCTTGGGAATCC-3' and reverse: 5'- CTGACAGCTCTTCTTCTAGTT-3'; GAPDH forward: 5'-ATGACC CCTTCATTGACCTCA-3' and reverse: 5'-GAGATGATGA CCCTTTTGGCT-3'. SATB1 transcripts was amplified for 30 cycles (1 min at 94degC, 1 min at 59degC, and 1 min at 72degC), and the cDNAs of GAPDH transcripts were amplified for 25 cycles (1 min at 94degC, 1 min at 55degC, and 1 min at 72). The PCR cycling numbers had been optimized to avoid amplification saturation. Ten micro-liters of the RT-PCR product was separated on 2% agarose gels, which were subsequently stained with ethidium bromide. Gels were visualized and band intensities were measured under the Kodak 2000R image station.
SATB1 Knockdown
PC-3M cells were transduced by SATB1 shRNA lentiviral particles, which is a pool of viral particle containing 3 target- specific constructs that encode 19-25 nt (plus hairpin) shRNA designed to knock down gene expression (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, CA; sc36460-v). PC-3M cells were plated in a 12 well plates 24 hrs prior to viral infection. Transductions were carried out in RPMI containing 10% complete medium (with serum and antibiotics) and incubate cells overnight. RPMI Complete medium was removed and supplemented with polybrene (5<mu>g/ml) complete RPMI medium. PC-3M cells were infected with by adding the shRNA lentiviral particles to the cells containing medium. All procedure was performed according to the manufacturer's protocol.
Colony Formation Assay
Approximately 400 cells of PC-3M and PC-3M (SATB1 knock down) cells were taken in 100-mm petridish (Falcon; Becton Dickinson, Lincoln Park, NJ) and cultured at 37degC in a humidified atmosphere of 5% CO2 and 95% air. After 12 days cells were washed with phosphate buffer and then stained with coomassie blue. Cells colonies were counted and photographed.
Tumor Xenograft Studies
Nude mice were purchased from the Case Comprehensive Cancer Center, athymic nude mice facility and maintained in microisolator cages. All animals were used in accordance with institutional guidelines and the current experiments were approved by the Use Committee for Animal Care at the Case Western Reserve University. Tumor cells, PC-3M and PC-3M (SATB1 knockout) were suspended in RPMI 1640 complete culture medium with 25% Matrigel (BD Biosciences) and inoculated 1x106 cells subcutaneously into the right and left flanks of 6 to 7-week-old nude mice. The mice were monitored daily for palpable tumor formation and tumors were measured twice a week using a Vernier caliper, weighed and photographed.
Statistical Analysis
The SATB1 nuclear expression data were summarized by mean (range) as well as box plot. Changes in tumor volume and body weight during the course of the experiments were visualized by scatter plot. Differences of SATB1 nuclear expression (per 1000 nuclei), tumor volume (mm3) and body weight at the termination of the experiment among various groups were examined using analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by Tukey's multiple comparison procedure. The statistical significance of differences between control and treatment group was determined by T-test for data from independent samples or paired T-test for data from correlated samples. All tests were two-tailed and p-values less than 0.05 were considered to be statistically significant.

Results
Expression of SATB1 Protein in Benign and Tumor Specimens
The expression profile of SATB1 was determined in the clinical specimens removed surgically. We performed Western blot analysis for SATB1 and CK18 as epithelial loading control in 14 benign, 14 low-grade prostate cancer (Gleason score <=7), and 6 high-grade tumor specimens (Gleason score >8-10). A typical blot shown in figure 1A, SATB1 was found to be expressed in both benign and cancerous prostate cancer tissues. Levels of SATB1 were significantly higher in the cancer specimens compared to the benign tissue. Densitometric analysis demonstrated 1.6-fold increase in SATB1 expression in low-grade tumor specimens and 2.62-fold in high-grade tumor specimens, compared to benign tissue. Next we determined whether SATB1 is upregulated at the message level. We performed RT-PCR for mRNA expression for SATB1 and GAPDH as a loading control. As shown in figure 1B, the mRNA transcript for SATB1 was significantly upregulated in high-grade tumors compared to low-grade tumors and benign tissue. Densitometric analysis demonstrated 1.64-fold increase in SATB1 mRNA expression in low-grade tumor specimens and 1.51-fold in high-grade tumors, compared to benign tissue. Since SATB1 is a nuclear protein and promotes a transcriptionally active chromatin structure by interacting with AT-rich DNA sequences, upregulated in cancer, therefore we determined the levels of this protein in cytosol and nuclear fraction in benign and tumor specimens obtained from same individual. Indeed, higher levels of SATB1 protein was present in the nuclear fraction compared to cytosol in the tumor tissue compared to the benign tissue (Figure 1C).
10.1371/journal.pone.0053527.g001
Figure 1
Expression of SATB1 in various representative benign, low-grade and high-grade human prostate tumor specimens.
(A) Protein expression of SATB1 in various grades of prostate tumors and benign tissue was analyzed by Western blotting; cytokeratin18 expression served as loading control. (B) SATB1 mRNA expression in various grades of prostate tumors and benign tissue; GAPDH mRNA expression served as loading control. (C) SATB1 protein expression in paired benign and cancer specimens from same individual was analyzed for cytoplasmic and nuclear distribution. Densitometric analysis for each blot is shown in the right panel. Details are described in 'materials and methods' section.
Next we analyzed SATB1 expression by immunohistochemical staining of the paraffin-embedded tissue sections consisting of 19 benign, 5 low-grade tumor (Gleason score 5-6), 10 median-grade tumor (Gleason score 7-8) and 5 high-grade tumors (Gleason score 9-10) in the tissue microarray (Figure 2). SATB1 expression was observed either in the nucleus or the cytoplasm or both, but predominantly seen in the nucleus of cancer cells. Compared to the benign tissue, a progressive increase in SATB1 expression was observed in the nucleus with increasing tumor grade. Low levels of SATB1 expression was observed in moderately differentiated tumors. Representative immunostaining images of SATB1 expression in benign and various tumor grades are shown in figure 2A. We also evaluated the nuclear levels of SATB1 in various histologic components of the tissue samples by counting the number of nuclei showing positive SATB1 expression at magnification X40, and analyzed the counts statistically by mean and standard deviation as well as boxplot analysis (Figure 2B). The differences of SATB1 nuclear expression (per 1000 nuclei) among benign and other grade tumor specimens were examined by analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by Tukey's pair-wise multiple comparison procedure. Benign specimen (n = 15) exhibited a mean of 56.93 stained nuclei (range 37-79), low-grade tumors with Gleason score of 5-6 (n = 13) showed a mean of 90.54 stained nuclei (range 56-115); moderately differentiated tumors with Gleason score of 7-8 (n = 12) exhibited a mean of 146.33 stained nuclei (range 93-198); and high-grade tumor with Gleason score 9-10 (n = 11) showed a mean of 205.27 (158-298) stained nuclei for SATB1. The nuclear SATB1 expression among 4 groups was highly statistically significant (P<0.0001). Furthermore, Tukey's pair-wise multiple comparison procedure demonstrated that SATB1 expression in high score tumor specimens was significantly higher than in the low score specimens (P<0.05).
10.1371/journal.pone.0053527.g002
Figure 2
Expression of SATB1 in various representative human prostate specimens.
(A) Paraffin-embedded (4.0 um) sections from benign and prostate cancer of various Gleason scores were used for SATB1 expression by immunohistochemistry. A strong nuclear and cytoplasmic staining was observed in Gleason score 3+3, whereas increased nuclear SATB1 staining was observed in high-grade cancer (Gleason score 3+4 and 4+5, respectively). Magnified at x20 and x40 (B) Statistical analysis of SATB1 nuclear presence was performed by comparing SATB1 positive nuclear stained cells from various locations from benign, score 5-6, score 7-8 and score 9-10 specimens. Data represents the mean+-SE. *P<0.05 versus corresponding control. P<0.05, Details are described in 'materials and methods' section.
SATB1 Expression in Human Prostate Cancer Cells
We examined SATB1 expression in 8 prostate epithelial cell lines, including non-tumorigenic virally transformed human prostate epithelial cells (PZ-HPV-7) and its cancer counterpart (CA-HPV-10), 3 primary prostate cancer cell lines viz. DU145, LNCaP and PC-3 and their biologically aggressive subclones: DUPro, C4-2B and PC-3M, respectively. As shown in figure 3A, SATB1 protein levels were higher in all prostate cancer cell lines compared to the non-tumorigenic PZ-HPV-7 cells. The primary cancer cell lines viz. CA-HPV-10, DU145, LNCaP and PC-3 cells express 7.94- to 16.82-fold increase in SATB1 expression compared to PZ-HPV-7 cells. The aggressive subclones exhibit 17.0- to 20.53-fold increase in SATB1 expression, compared to non-tumorigenic cells. We also compared the cytosolic and nuclear expression of SATB1 in LNCaP and PC-3 their respective subclones C4-2B, and PC-3M cells. As shown in figure 3B, the expression of SATB1 in LNCaP and PC-3 cells were relatively similar in cytosolic and nuclear fractions. In contrast, high levels of SATB1 protein expression was observed in the nuclear fraction of the aggressive subclone C4-2B and PC-3M cells. These results are in agreement with the tissue specimens where significantly high nuclear SATB1 expression correlated with disease aggressiveness.
10.1371/journal.pone.0053527.g003
Figure 3
SATB1 protein expressions in virally transformed prostate epithelial cells, and various prostate cancer cells.
(A) Western blotting for SATB1 protein expression in various prostate cancer cells; CA-HPV-10, DUPro, DU145, PC-3, PC-3M, LNCaP and C4-2B including transformed epithelial (PZ-HPV-7), cells. (B) Cytoplasmic and nuclear SATB1 protein expression was analyzed in prostate cancer parental cell lineage and their aggressive subclones LNCaP and C4-2B; PC-3 and PC-3M which represented higher nuclear presence of SATB1 in aggressive subclones. Histone H4 served as loading control. Densitometric analysis for each blot is shown in the right panel. Details are described in 'materials and methods' section.
SATB1 Knockdown Reduces Aggressiveness of Prostate Cancer Cells
We investigated whether SATB1 is required for the invasive phenotype of prostate cancer cells. In the experiment, PC-3M cells which express high constitutive levels of SATB1 were used and short hairpin RNAs (shRNA) to knockdown SATB1 expression. We used shRNA from two different SATB1 sequences (shRNA1 and shRNA2) and control shRNA in the highly aggressive PC-3M cells. As shown in figure 4A, SATB1 expression was significantly reduced by 85.5% and 77.5% in both SATB1 shRNA1 and shRNA2, respectively, whereas no significant alterations in the SATB1 expression was noted in PC-3M cells treated with control shRNA. Furthermore, SATB1 knockdown decreased the migration and invasion capabilities of PC-3M cells compared with the parental cell line and control shRNA cells. The migration and invasive capacity in vitro of SATB1 mRNA cells was reduced by 68-80%, which correlated with increased expression of E-cadherin and decreased levels of MMP-9 after shRNA knockdown (Figure 4B). Reduction of SATB1 levels in PC-3M cells decreased cell proliferation, restored anchorage-dependent growth and reverted the cells to a polarized morphology as observed under light microscopy (Figure 4C).
10.1371/journal.pone.0053527.g004
Figure 4
Effect of suppression of SATB1 expression by small hairpin RNA (shRNA) in prostate cancer PC-3M cells.
Prostate cancer PC-3M cells were transfected with and without DNA (mock), or the SATB1-targeted shRNA vector 1and 2 and continued in culture for 24 h. (A) SATB1, E-cadherin, MMP9 and <beta>-actin total protein expressions were analyzed by Western blotting. (B) SATB1 silencing in PC-3M cells was associated with low invasive and migration potential. Bars represents the mean+-SE of three different assays. **P<0.001 versus control. (C) Representative PC-3M cells images are shown with and without SATB1 shRNA transfection. Details are described in 'materials and methods' section.
SATB1 Promotes Aggressive Phenotype in Prostate Epithelial Cells
We next examined whether ectopic expression of SATB1 is sufficient to induce invasive activity in virally transformed non-tumorigenic human prostate epithelial cells. Control PZ-HPV-7 cells were transiently transfected with pCMV6-A6 True Clone human plasmid DNA containing SATB1 and with SATB1 mock RNA. Transfection with SATB1 expression plasmid increased the expression of SATB1 in PZ-HPV-7 cells and increased migration and invasion capabilities in vitro by 50-67%. SATB1 overexpression in PZ-HPV-7 cells resulted in the decreased expression of E-cadherin and increase in MMP-9 levels in these cells (Figure 5A-C).
10.1371/journal.pone.0053527.g005
Figure 5
Overexpression of SATB1 in transformed normal prostate epithelial PZ-HPV-7 cells.
PZ-HPV-7 cells were transfected with and without DNA (mock), or the SATB1-targeted vector 1 and continued in culture for 24 h. (A) SATB1, E-cadherin, MMP9 and Histone H4 protein expressions were determined in the cytosolic and nuclear fraction by Western blotting. SATB1 overexpression resulted in decrease E-cadherin expression and upregulated MMP9 expression. (B) Overexpression of SATB1 in PZ-HPV-7 cells was associated with increased invasive potential. Bars represents the mean+-SE of three different assays. **P<0.001 versus control. (C) Representative PZ-HPV-7 images with and without SATB1 overexpression vector trasfection. Details are described in 'materials and methods' section.
SATB1 Depletion Inhibits Tumor Growth in Athymic Nude Mice Xenograft
We tested whether SATB1 depletion from PC-3M cells inhibited tumor growth. For these studies we developed cell lines that were stably silenced for SATB1 expression using a shRNA-lentiviral delivery system. Cells were selected up to 10 passages and cells above passage 11 were used for the studies. A significant decrease in SATB1 expression was observed in PC-3M-KO cells. Knockdown of SATB1 was more prominent in the nuclear fraction in these cells. SATB1-KO cells exhibited an increase in doubling time from 26.86+-4.89 h, compared to PC-3M cells with 20.04+-4.34 h, respectively. We also determined the invasive capacity in vitro of SATB1-KO cells. Consistent depletion of SATB1 reduced the colony formation of these cells in soft agar, indicating that loss of SATB1 restored their anchorage-dependent growth (Figure S1 A-C).
We next proceeded to in vivo studies. The control PC-3M cells and SATB1 KO cells were injected to the flanks of nude mice to form tumors. The tumor volume was recorded on alternate days and the experiment was terminated on 31 day as the tumor size of PC-3M tumors was large, whereas mice injected with SATB1 KO clone resulted in reduced tumor growth with a decrease in tumor weight and volume (P<0.003) (Figure 6 A-C). We also measured the protein expression of proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA), E-cadherin, MMP9 and SATB1 in these tumors. As shown in figure 6 D; SATB1 knockdown resulted in marked reduction in the protein expression of PCNA in the tumor xenografts. An increase in E-cadherin expression was observed in SATB1-KO tumors compared to PC-3M tumors. These results indicate that SATB1 expression in PC-3M cells may be a requisite for the tumor growth and aggressiveness of these cells.
10.1371/journal.pone.0053527.g006
Figure 6
Effect of SATB1 knock down in tumor growth in athymic nude xenograft.
(A) SATB1 knockout in PC-3M cells resulted in decrease in tumor volume. (B) Photograph of tumor xenograft in PC-3M and SATB1-KO tumors. (C) Tumors were excised, weighed, and measured at the termination of the study. Tumor weight was significantly reduced in SATB1-KO tumors in athymic nude mice. Approximately 1x106 cells were injected in the flanks of each mouse to initiate ectopic prostate tumor as described in 'materials and methods'. Tumor size were measured twice weekly in two dimensions throughout the study. Tumor volume (mm3) and wet weight of tumors are represented as the mean of 8-10 tumors in control PC-3M and SATB1-KO PC-3M tumors. **P<0.003; Bars; Mean +- SE. (D) Western Blots for PCNA, E-cadherin, MMP9, and SATB1 in tumor lysates from PC-3M and SATB1-KO tumors. The blots were stripped and reprobed with anti-<beta>-actin antibody to ensure equal protein loading by a representative blot. Details are described in 'materials and methods' section.

Discussion
In the present study, we first showed that SATB1 is over-expressed in human prostate cancer specimens. Nuclear presence of SATB1 was associated with higher Gleason scores and aggressive behavior of tumor cells. In keeping with these observations in clinical prostate cancer specimens, ectopic introduction of SATB1 led to increase invasiveness of prostate epithelial cells by induction of EMT. On the contrary, knockdown of SATB1 in highly aggressive prostate cancer cells reversed invasiveness and migration capabilities. Our data provide insight into the role of SATB1 in prostate cancer invasiveness and biologic aggressiveness.
SATB1 activation and its role in hematopoietic cells have been previously reported [14], [15]. SATB1 is expressed in high levels in thymocytes and is critical for their differentiation [31]. SATB1 overexpression has been correlated with invasive behavior, metastatic phenotype and poor prognosis in gastric cancers and its mechanistic role has been demonstrated in breast cancer [25], [26]. SATB1 has been shown to coordinate the expression of large number of genes that induce invasiveness and aggressive biologic behavior, reprogramming breast cancer cells and promoting tumor growth and metastasis. The global changes in gene expression are promoted by active chromatin structural changes controlled by the DNA binding properties of SATB1 [32], [33]. In our present study of prostate cancer, we found that SATB1 expression is associated with high histologic grade and its nuclear presence correlates with tumor aggressiveness. Although aberrant expression of SATB1 has been reported in some human cancers, some investigators have not found a positive correlation between SATB1overexpression and disease progression. In one study, loss of SATB1 expression was shown to correlate with poor survival in lung cancer patients, possibly due to epigenetic silencing [34]. Results of an investigation on breast cancer suggested that SATB1 expression did not promote breast cancer progression and was not associated with disease outcome [35]. Importantly, other independent studies have linked SATB1 expression to chemotherapy-induced EMT transitions, metastasis and multi-drug resistance in breast cancer [26], [36], [37]. Several recent studies indicate that high SATB1 at the protein or message level correlates with advanced stages of cancer and poor prognosis in cases of melanoma, laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma, and carcinomas of breast, stomach, colon, liver and ovary [18]-[26]. These findings are consistent with our present findings, which provide additional support for the concept that SATB1 plays important role in the behavior of many types of cancer.
The mechanism of SATB1 activation in human cancers is not clear and may depend on specific cell type and activating stimuli in the tumor microenvironment. Studies demonstrate that SATB1 acts as a 'landing platform' for chromatin remodeling factors and posttranslational modification may be critical to modulate gene transcription [13]. A recent study on prostate cancer has shown that dedifferentiation of matrix attachment region and variation in the expression of poly (ADP ribose) polymerase and SATB1 triggers passage towards a more aggressive phenotype [38]. In support of this notion, another study has shown that Wnt signaling causes an increase in SATB1 DNA binding by promoting deacetylation of SATB1, inducing an increase in SATB1 binding to the DNA and recruitment of b-catenin [39]. Increased binding of b-catenin to SATB1 recruits additional proteins stimulating gene expression, indirectly converting SATB1 from a repressor to an activator of gene expression, a phenomenon which could be associated with tumor progression. It will be interesting to understand the mechanism of SATB1 activation in prostate cancer.
Invasiveness is a key step that leads to metastasis and results in poor outcome [2]. Therefore it is of tremendous value to study the molecular mechanisms of prostate cancer invasiveness. Our data shows that SATB1 over-expression, particularly its nuclear presence, is seen in highly aggressive prostate cancer cell lines compared to non-aggressive primary cancer cells. These results strongly suggest a role of SATB1 in prostate cancer invasiveness. The direct effect of SATB1 on prostate cancer aggressiveness was confirmed by stable knockout SATB1 in PC-3M cells, which showed lower levels of SATB1 expression, correlated with increase in doubling time, proliferation efficiency and anchorage-independent colony formation. Importantly, depletion of SATB1 led primarily to inhibition of the invasive and migration ability of tumor cells (68-80%), rather than inhibition of cellular growth and proliferation (30-35%), respectively. Consistently, ectopic SATB1 introduction led to increased invasion and migration capabilities in non-tumorigenic prostate epithelial cells. It would be interesting to dissect this differential effect of SATB1 on cell aggressiveness versus cellular proliferation in prostate cancer cells.
Accumulating evidence has shown that EMT, a process first identified in embryogenesis, mediates tumor progression through local invasion, spreading of tumor cells through circulation and metastasis [3]-[5]. Several developmental genes have been shown to induce EMT and act as E-cadherin repressors [7]. As the loss of E-cadherin expression is the hallmark of EMT [5], [6], [8], we examined whether SATB1 directly induces EMT changes by ectopic transfection of SATB1 cDNA into PZ-HPV-7 cells. Our results demonstrate that ectopic SATB1 conferred morphologic changes from epithelial to fibrobastic appearance which was gained by the expression of MMP9, and loss of epithelial marker, E-cadherin in the cytosolic fraction. To further examine whether SATB1 inhibited E-cadherin expression, we performed experiments to knockdown SATB1 in highly metastatic PC-3M cells. Depletion of SATB1 resulted in increased expression of E-cadherin and decrease in MMP-9 expression.
In conclusion, we have shown that SATB1 expression induces invasiveness through EMT, which correlates with prostate cancer aggressiveness and tumor progression. Our findings not only provide prognostic significance for the role of SATB1 in prostate cancer but also suggest a novel therapeutic target for the prevention of prostate cancer progression.

Supporting Information
Figure S1
(A) SATB1 expression after knockdown in PC-3M cells. PC-3M cells were stably transfected using SATB1 a single lentiviral short hairpin RNA vector, protein expression of cytosolic and nuclear fractions represented traceable amount of SATB1 protein expression in the nucleus of transfected PC-3M cells than control vector, where histone H4 protein expression was taken as nuclear loading control (B) Cell doubling time was significantly increased approximately 7 h in PC-3M SATB1-KO cells than control PC-3M cells. (C) Anchorage-independent colony formation assay demonstrated a significant decrease in the colony formation in SATB1-KO PC-3M cells. Details are described in 'materials and methods' section.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
