[Abstract, Introduction, Results, Discussion, Methods]

The Multi-Leu Peptide
Inhibitor Discriminates Between
PACE4 and Furin And Exhibits Antiproliferative Effects On Prostate
Cancer Cells. The proprotein convertases (PCs) play an important role in protein precursor activation through processing at paired basic residues. However, significant substrate cleavage redundancy has been reported between PCs. The question remains whether specific PC inhibitors can be designed. This study describes the identification of the sequence LLLLRVKR, named Multi-Leu (ML)-peptide, that displayed a 20-fold selectivity on PACE4 over furin, two enzymes with similar structural characteristics. We have previously demonstrated that PACE4 plays an important role in prostate cancer and could be a druggable target. The present study demonstrates that the ML-peptide significantly reduced the proliferation of DU145 and LNCaP prostate cancer-derived cell lines and induced G0/G1 cell cycle arrest. However, the ML-peptide must enter the cell to inhibit proliferation. It is concluded that peptide-based inhibitors can yield specific PC inhibitors and that the ML-peptide is an important lead compound that could potentially have applications in prostate cancer.

Introduction
The proprotein convertases (PCs) are members
of a mammalian family
of endoproteases related to the bacterial subtilisin and the yeast
kexin. Their main function is to activate precursors within the secretory
pathway. There are seven PCs that cleave proteins at paired basic
amino acid residues, namely furin, PC2, PC1/3, PC4, PACE4, PC5/6,
and PC7.1 The optimal PC recognition sequence
is R-X-K/R-R|, while the minimal consensus sequence is R-X-X-R|.
A variety of substrates have been described including precursors of
hormones, enzymes, growth factors, receptors, cell membrane proteins,
and plasma proteins but also a number of pathogenic proteins such
as viral glycoproteins and bacterial toxins.2 There is growing evidence of the involvement of PCs in various cancers.
Our previous work showed that PACE4 has a role in prostate cancer
cellular proliferation.3 PACE4 has a wide
expression pattern and is constitutively secreted into the extracellular
media.4 It has been suggested from immunohistochemical
observations that in addition to its localization within the secretory
pathway, PACE4 is also localized at the cell surface through interactions
between its cysteine-rich domain (CRD) and heparan sulfate proteoglycan
(HSPG)5 or tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases
(TIMPs).6 Recently, two independent studies
(including one from our group) showed a specific overexpression of
PACE4 mRNA in prostate cancer tissues.3,7 This overexpression
is correlated with higher circulating protein levels in some patients.7 Using a molecular inhibition approach, the relevance
of PACE4 in a prostate cancer model has been demonstrated.3 As the expression levels of other PCs remains
unchanged, it was suggested that a selective PACE4 inhibitor, with
limited inhibition toward furin, might provide a useful tool against
prostate cancer. To our knowledge, no such inhibitor has been yet
reported (for complete review see ref.1,2).
Designing
specific PC inhibitors represent an important challenge.
The high homology level deep within the catalytic cleft suggests that
small-molecule inhibitors acting as competitive inhibitors will be
unlikely to produce any specificity.1,8,9 Indeed, structural evidence indicates that the PC
active sites are nearly identical in their S1-S4 subsites.a However, there are notable
differences found at the S5 subsite and beyond.1 This suggests that peptide-based inhibitors could
be designed to achieve the desired specificity, although they would
require a minimum of six residues. There is some proof for this concept
based on discovered endogenous peptide inhibitors, such as the 7B2
CT-peptide, which is a highly potent (nM range) and specific PC2 inhibitor.10,11 Of course, each PC also has an endogenous inhibitor within its structure,
namely their prodomains, of which the C-terminal
region provides the critical positions for inhibition at the catalytic
sites. PC prodomains first act in the ER as intramolecular chaperones
and then as activity delayers through interactions in cis with the
active site of their cognate PC. The derived prodomains have been
shown to be potent PC inhibitors in trans but display minimal levels
of specificity.12-14 Last, the screening of peptide combinatorial libraries
has led to the identification of polyarginine peptides as furin inhibitors,15,16 however, these are also not highly specific.
The present study
reports the development of a new PACE4 inhibitor,
named the Multi-Leucine (ML)-peptide. Our focus remains primarily
on discriminating between our target PACE4 and furin, which is the
only ubiquitously PC enzyme in normal tissues. Since it is known that
furin inhibition can be lethal (i.e., as demonstrated in furin knockout
mice17,18), it appears logical to design an inhibitor
that primarily avoids furin as a target. We also present some of the
characteristics of the ML-peptide as a potent inhibitor of proliferation
in prostate cancer cell lines.

Results
PCs Inhibition by Recombinant Prodomains
PC prodomains
act as cis regulatory inhibitors during the maturation process and
have been considered as lead compounds for PC inhibition. Our previous
work assessed the inhibitory potency of the prodomains as trans competitive
inhibitors.13 However, their inhibitory
potency has never been carried out for PACE4 until now (Figure 1a). We observed that most PC prodomains displayed
similar inhibition potencies for PACE4 and furin, with Ki values ranging from low nanomolar (12.4 nM) to subnanomolar
levels (0.34 nM). The inhibition ratios (furin/PACE4) were always
in the range of 1-5 for all prodomains, with the exception
of the PC7 prodomain, which displayed a 36-fold inhibition preference
for PACE4 over furin. The Ki obtained
with the PC7 prodomain on PACE4 (0.34 nM) is lower than the Ki previously reported for inhibition of PC7
by its own prodomain.13
Figure 1
PC prodomains as PACE4
inhibitors. (a) PCs prodomains were produced
and purified to perform inhibition assays toward PACE4 and furin.
The ratio between Ki for furin and PACE4,
namely the specificity ratio, point out the selectivity of PC7 prodomain
toward PACE4. This inhibitor is a 36-fold better inhibitor for PACE4
than furin. Kis in the table
are means and standard deviations of three independent experiments.
(b) PCs prodomain sequence alignment was performed for the region
P7-P1 downstream primary cleavage site. Dark background indicates
conserved residues, while light-gray background indicates residues
of same type than consensus. Bold letters represent hydrophobic residues.
UniProtKB accession numbers are the following: hfurin (P09958), mPC1/3
(P63239), hPC2 (P16519), mPC4 (P2921), hPC5/6 (Q92824), hPC7 (Q16549),
and hPACE4 (P29122).
To further investigate the selectivity of PC7 prodomain
inhibition
toward PACE4, a sequence alignment was performed, focusing on the C-terminal regions (Figure 1b). Although
prodomains are approximately 100 amino acids in length, our analysis
focused on the dissimilarities in the P1-P7 region of the primary
cleavage site. Because those residues are directly implicated in molecular
recognition by PCs, we hypothesized that the 36-fold difference might
be related to this C-terminal region. The sequence
alignment (Figure 1b) reveals that the PC7
prodomain differs from the consensus in position P6, as it does not
exhibit a basic amino acid at this position. Apart from the PC2 prodomain,
a poor inhibitor of both furin and PACE4, only PC7 is dissimilar from
consensus in this position. It is well-known that the presence of
a basic residue in position P6 promotes increased inhibition potency
for furin.16,19-22 However, the observation of Leu residues
at P6 and P7 positions of the PC7 prodomain suggests that PACE4 may
have a preference for hydrophobic residues.
PS-SPCL to Profile PC-Inhibitor Recognition
The use
of combinatorial libraries has proven its relevance for the rational
design of inhibitors.23-25 This method has also been used for PC recognition
pattern studies.15,26,27 An 8-mer Positional Scanning-Synthetic Peptide Combinatorial Libraries
(PS-SPCL) approach was used to further study differences in furin
and PACE4 inhibition. Because it is hypothesized that specific PC
inhibition will be reached by varying the P5-P8 positions,
this library was synthesized by fixing the P1-P4 positions
with the core consensus motif RVKR while using the combinatorial method
for the P5-P8 positions. This pattern ensures that each peptide
in the library has the ability to be recognized and bind to the PC's
active site. The inhibition profiles for PACE4 and furin at the P6
position are shown in (Figure 2). As expected,
peptides with Arg and Lys at the P6 position were the most potent
PACE4 inhibitors (Ki = 40 and 37 nM, respectively).
It is interesting to note that peptides with hydrophobic Leu residue
displayed equally strong PACE4 inhibitory potency (Ki = 49 nM) (Figure 2). In contrast,
when testing furin inhibition, peptides containing Leu in P6 had a
much higher inhibition constant (900 nM) whereas peptides with Lys
and Arg at this position maintained mid-nM range inhibition constants
(230 and 300 nM, respectively). For this purpose, the specificity
ratios were most important and led to the observation that peptides
containing a Leu residue showed a 18-fold ratio (furin/PACE4). The
second highest ratio was obtained with peptide containing His residue
with a 11-fold specificity ratio. It is relevant to mention that pH
differences in the enzymatic assays might influence this result (pH
6.5 for PACE4 and pH 7.5 for furin) given that the histidine side-chain
pKa is 6.08.
Figure 2
Use of SP-SPCL to profile
PC-inhibitor recognition. To better understand
the recognition patterns of PACE4 and furin, SP-SPCL was used toward
both enzymes. For each sample in this table, the general recognition
pattern RVKR is present in positions P1-P4 and P6 position
are occupied by a unique amino acid. The other positions of those
peptides are occupied by an equimolar mixture (X) of the 19 natural
amino acids, cysteine excluded. Ki was
calculated from IC50 using the Cheng and Prussof equation
for competitive inhibitors. Kis are means
and standard deviations of at least two independent experiments.
Thus, this partial combinatorial library approach
confirmed that
PACE4 tolerates the presence of a hydrophobic amino acid in the P6
position whereas furin did not and presents a clear preference for
basic amino acids in this position. On the basis of these results,
peptides containing Leu at the P6 position should lead to selectivity
for PACE4.
Multiple Leu Extensions of RVKR-NH2 Generate Potent Inhibitors of PACE4
As
a Leu containing peptide could offer a selective inhibition toward
PACE4, the effects of Leu N-terminal extensions of
the core sequence Ac-RVKR-NH2, a poor micromolar inhibitor of PCs, was investigated in vitro
(Figure 3). The peptide Ac-LLRVKR-NH2 was a midnanomolar inhibitor of PACE4, but the progressive
addition of N-terminal Leu decreased the inhibition
constant to the low nanomolar range (18-22 nM) for both Ac-LLLRVKR-NH2 and Ac-LLLLRVKR-NH2. However, the subsequent
addition of leucine residues increased Ki values, reaching higher nanomolar values (300 nM) for the decapeptide
Ac-LLLLLLRVKR-NH2. Peptides
containing three to four Leu residues were the most potent inhibitors
of PACE4 evaluated in this study and were significantly more effective
on PACE4 than furin (20-22-fold). The peptide Ac-LLLLRVKR-NH2 and now designated as the
ML-peptide was chosen as lead inhibitor for further characterization
on PACE4 inhibition. The inhibitory potency of the ML-peptide was
also assayed with other members of the PC family and also showed high
levels of specificity (Supporting Information
Table S1).
Figure 3
Multi-Leucine peptides. To stabilize PC-inhibitor
interaction, N-terminal leucine extensions were added
to the core RVKR
sequence. (a,b) Each peptide was assayed with PACE4 and furin in an
inhibition assay. (c) Kis in this table
are means and standard deviations of three independent experiments.
The specificity ratio represents the relative inhibition preference
toward PACE4. Peptides Ac-LLLRVKR-NH2 and Ac-LLLLRVKR-NH2 were
the most potent and the most selective inhibitors of PACE4 of this
library. The peptide Ac-LLLLRVKR-NH2, named Multi-Leu peptide (ML), was selected as lead compound
for further studies.
The ML-Peptide As an Inhibitor of Prostate Cancer Cell Proliferation
In a previous study, PACE4 was proposed as a new therapeutic target
in prostate cancer3 based on a molecular
inhibition approach using the prostate cancer cell line DU145. Because
the molecular inhibition of PACE4 in DU145 cells had dramatic effects
on cell proliferation in vitro and in vivo, we decided to test the
ML-peptide as a pharmacological inhibitor to achieve identical results.
In the present study, two additional prostate cancer cell lines were
included, namely LNCaP and PC3 cells. Thus, PACE4 expression level
was first evaluated in LNCaP and PC3 cell lines in comparison to DU145
cells using a RT-qPCR approach (Figure 4a).
PACE4 was most highly expressed in LNCaP cells, with nearly 6-fold
higher levels than DU145 cells, but was almost absent in PC3 cells.
DU145 and LNCaP cells also exhibited higher levels of furin mRNA than
PC3 cells. Similar expression levels were observed for PC5/6 and PC7
within all cell lines investigated and PC1/3 and PC2 were undetectable.
The effect of the Multi-Leu peptide on cellular proliferation of each
cell line was evaluated using MTT assays (Figure 4b). The ML-peptide showed a very poor inhibition of PC3 cells,
whereas the half-maximal inhibitory concentrations (IC50) were in the micromolar range for DU145 and LNCaP cells (100 +-
10 and 180 +- 60 mM, respectively). Thus, the ML-peptide
inhibited the proliferation of DU145 and LNCaP cells, but not PC3
cells, showing a strong correlation with cellular PACE4 expression.
Figure 4
ML-peptide
as an inhibitor of prostate cancer cell proliferation.
In previous work, our research team proposed PACE4 as a therapeutic
target against prostate cancer progression.3 (a) DU145, LNCaP, and PC3 prostate-cancer derived cell lines were
first screened to compare their PCs expression levels using RT-qPCR.
PACE4 was highly expressed in DU145 and LNCaP and almost absent from
PC3. (b) To assess the efficiency of our new PACE4 inhibitor in such
context, MTT assays were performed on those cell lines. ML is efficient
to inhibit proliferation and metabolic activity in DU145 and LNCaP,
two PACE4-expressing cell lines, indicating a possible role for ML
as a prostate cancer therapeutic. (c) To prove that the inhibition
observed is a PCs dependent mechanism, the peptide Ac-LLLLRVK[DArg]-NH2 was used as negative control.
Because the P1 position is a key residue of the recognition pattern,
the replacement of P1 Arg by DArg significantly affected the Ki for this peptide. (d,e) As expected from inhibition
constant values, the peptide Ac-LLLLRVK[DArg]-NH2 is a poor proliferation inhibitor in a MTT assays with
DU145 and LNCaP.
An additional control experiment was performed
to test the PC-specific
interaction of the ML-peptide resulting in cell proliferation inhibition
by designing a ML-peptide substituted at the P1 position with a DArg.
As the P1 Arg position is critical for PC recognition, this modification
should strongly abrogate the observed effects unless they are not
PC-mediated. As expected, the peptide Ac-LLLLRVK-[DArg]-NH2 showed a substantial loss of affinity
in vitro going from a nM to a mM inhibitor (Figure 4c) (Kis = 1380 and 2600 nM for
PACE4 and furin, respectively). Consistent with this affinity loss,
this peptide also showed a significant loss of potency in both DU145
(Figure 4d) and LNCaP (Figure 4e) cell-based assays (IC50 440 +- 80 and 390
+- 10 mM, respectively). These data make a strong case that
decreased cell proliferation is mediated by PC inhibition.
The ML-Peptide Targets Intracellular PACE4 to Inhibit DU145
Proliferation
PACE4 is localized both at the cell surface
and within the intracellular secretory pathway.5,6,28 Thus, it was relevant to determine whether
the inhibitory effect of the ML-peptide is mediated by cell surface
and/or intracellular PACE4. To elucidate this question, ML-peptide
analogues bearing N-terminal modifications with strikingly
different cell penetration properties were designed. The ML-peptide
was coupled with an N-terminal amino-poly(ethylene
glycol)-8 (a-amine-o-propionic acid octaethylene glycol,
known as PEG8) group that should render the peptide much less hydrophobic,
whereas a N-terminal hydrophobic 8-amino-octanoyl
(C8) chain was used in order to increase its hydrophobicity. In vitro
enzymatic activity assays demonstrated that PEGylation and alkylation
of the ML-peptide did not alter its potency or selectivity for PACE4
inhibition (Figure 5a). The uptake of FITC-labeled
versions of these ML-peptide analogues were tested on DU145 cells
and analyzed using a fluorescence-activated cell sorter (FACS) (Figure 5b). The FITC-b-Ala-ML-peptide had excellent
cell penetration properties, considering it is relatively unmodified,
suggesting that the hydrophobic content of this peptide is sufficient
to penetrate cell membranes (see also confocal microscopy in Supporting Information Figure S1). However, cells
treated with FITC-[PEG8]ML-peptide showed a geometric mean of the
distribution (GeoMean) of about 1 log unit lower than the one measured
for the FITC-b-Ala-ML-peptide (5.43-7.84 vs 48.90-52.82).
These results indicate that the FITC-[PEG8]-ML-peptide penetrates
the cell membrane very poorly. As expected, the FITC-C8-ML-peptide
displayed greater cell penetration properties with 5-fold greater
GeoMean compared to the control FITC-b-Ala-ML-peptide (260.08-261.95
vs 48.90-52.82, respectively). When all three peptides were
tested on DU145 cells, the [C8]-ML-peptide gave very similar results
to the ML-peptide by maintaining antiproliferative effects (IC50s 80-100 mM) while the [PEG8]-ML-peptide could
no longer reduce cell proliferation (IC50 was estimated
to be >500 mM) (Figure 5c,d). This
result
provides strong evidence that the antiproliferative actions of the
ML-peptide were largely mediated by intracellular PACE4. A second
conclusion is that the cell penetration properties of the unmodified
ML-peptide are sufficient to achieve a near maximal effect.
Figure 5
ML-peptide
targets intracellular PACE4 to inhibit prostate cancer
cell lines proliferation. (a) To determine whether the cell proliferation
effects are mediated by cell surface or intracellular PACE4, ML N-terminal extensions were design to modify cell penetration
properties of our inhibitor. Neither PEGylation (PEG8) nor alkylation
(C8) modified the affinity of Multi-Leucine inhibitor toward PACE4
and furin, as determined in a kinetic assay. (b) The uptake of FITC-labeled
peptides was tested on DU145 cells and analyzed by FACS. The FITC-b-Ala-ML-peptide
has excellent cell penetration properties. Comparison of GeoMeans
(numbers adjacent the peaks) obtained with these three peptides indicates
that PEGylation prevents cell entry, whereas alkylation increases
the uptake of the inhibitor. (c) Using a MTT metabolic assay, it was
clearly demonstrated that alkylation increases inhibitory potency
of ML peptide, whereas PEGylation leads to a poor proliferation inhibitor
in DU145 cell line. (d) IC50 in the table are means of
five independent experiments. N.C. means the curve did not converged
to 50% with doses up to 500 mM. This assay demonstrates that
ML peptide must enter the cell in order to inhibit DU145 proliferation.
The ML-Peptide Induces Cell Cycle Arrest
To obtain
further support for the antiproliferation effects observed, a DNA
content analysis on LNCaP treated cells was performed with 100 or
200 mM of ML-peptide (Figure 6). As these
assays are performed over a 96 h period, which could result in peptide
degradation, a modified analogue Ac-[DLeu]LLLRVKR-NH2 was also used. The substitution of
the N-terminal Leu by a DLeu provided improved stability
of the peptide to amino-peptidases (unpublished data). A dose-dependent
G0/G1 accumulation and S phase decrease were
observed following exposure to ML-peptide and ML-peptide analogue.
Following a 200 mM treatment with the Ac-[DLeu]LLLRVKR-NH2, a 10% increase in the G0/G1 population was observed along with an increase
in cells with hypodiploid DNA content (sub-G1) proportions,
which represent apoptotic cells.
Figure 6
Cell viability and cell cycle analyses
of ML-peptide treated LNCaP.
The effect of PACE4 inhibition on cell cycle distribution was observed
by flow cytometry. LNCaP cells were treated for 96 h with 100 or 200
mM of peptide. (a) Ac-LLLLRVKR-NH2 or (b) Ac-[DLeu]LLLRVKR-NH2. Cell cycle distribution was assessed from
cellular DNA content analysis of cells treated with propidium iodine.
The percentage of cells in each phases were calculated from total
living cells. Hypodiploid DNA content (sub-G1) represents
cells undergoing apoptosis. The experiment was done three times in
duplicates. The significance of the results were established from
an unpaired two-tailed t test. (* p < 0.05; ** p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001). (c) Data in the table are mean and standard deviation
of a representative experiment.

Discussion and Conclusions
Furin was the first discovered
PC, and ever since the discovery
of additional PCs, issues of distinct and redundant functions have
been debated for this family of enzymes.2,4,29,30 While this remains
a fundamental interrogation, it can also be envisaged that an answer
to this question could have repercussions on the druggability of PCs
in various pathologies. Structural data have been very clear that
within the deep subsites of the catalytic cleft (S1-S4), the
PCs appear to be virtually identical. This has an immediate consequence
from a medicinal chemistry point of view, that small-molecule inhibitors
(i.e, small organic compounds) will not be specific if they are competitive
inhibitors. It cannot be excluded that small molecules could specifically
inhibit PCs if they have an allosteric mechanism of action, but to
date no such inhibitors have been reported nor have druggable allosteric
PC sites been established. Therefore, the most probable option presently
is to use peptides as lead compounds to design specific PC inhibitors.
This is plausible based on the observed structural differences within
the S4-S7 subsites, as deduced by homology modeling of the
furin structure. Peptide-based inhibitors afford a number of advantages,
the principal one being a great variety of structures that could provide
an optimal fit, providing the sought specificity. The disadvantages
of peptide-based inhibitors are in their further use as in vivo drug
compounds because they can be readily degraded, may be excreted rapidly,
and are said not to be very cell penetrable. However, these obstacles
can be overcome through peptidomimetic approaches. There is mounting
evidence of the potential benefits of inhibiting PACE4 in prostate
cancer cells. Should a therapeutic application be possible, it would
have to be through the development of a relatively specific PACE4
inhibitor. Thus, we have focused our studies on a peptide-based approach
to target PACE4, with the full knowledge of the obstacles that may
arise.
As the starting point to design a specific PACE4 inhibitor,
the
potency and the selectivity of purified PC prodomains toward PACE4
and furin were evaluated (Figure 1a). As furin
is the only basic amino acids cleaving PC ubiquitously expressed (i.e.,
defined as expressed in every single normal cell) and furin full knockouts
in mice have proven to be lethal,17 it
seemed appropriate to establish an inhibitor that favors PACE4 as
much as possible over furin. This objective may appear almost insurmountable
due to the stated structural similarities of the two enzymes and multiple
data suggesting very similar substrates. Nonetheless, the peptide
designs focus on obtaining the best specificity ratio of furin/PACE4
inhibitory potency (furin Ki /PACE4 Ki).
As previously reported in various studies, including
our own previous
work,12-14 PCs prodomains are highly potent inhibitors of PCs
(nM and sub-nM range), except for PC2 prodomain, which displays no
inhibition at concentrations up to 1 mM. However, one observation
stands out, namely the specificity ratio of the PC7 prodomain, which
was 36-fold (furin Ki/PACE4 Ki). The alignment of PC prodomains was performed for region
P7 to P1, as this region contains key residues for substrate-PCs recognition
(Figure 1b) and highlights the higher density
of hydrophobic residues in this region. The PC7 prodomain clearly
stands out as it differs from the consensus in position P6. This suggests
that basic residue in P6 position could be crucial for potent furin
inhibition, whereas PACE4 may tolerate a broad range of residues for
this position.
The combinatorial peptide library provided additional
support for
this hypothesis (Figure 2). This library was
anchored at the C-terminal with the consensus motif
RVKR to allow the study of P5-P8 positions. It was first observed
that Kis were higher for furin than PACE4
for every peptide mixture. As positions P8, P7, and P5 of those samples
are occupied by an equimolar mix of the 19 natural amino acids (cysteine
excluded), this could indicate that PACE4 can accommodate a more diversified
selection of amino acids. Thus, when looking at Kis for position P6 for furin, it can be concluded that
furin has a marked preference for basic residues, as Lys and Arg peptides
are the only midnanomolar inhibitors of this enzyme in this library.
On the other hand, although P6 Lys and P6 Arg peptides are mid-nM
inhibitors of PACE4, similar levels of inhibition can be reached with
P6 Leu peptides. The highest specificity ratios for P6 position were
obtained from Leu, His, Val, Ile, and Ala containing peptides. On
the basis of the hydrophobic nature of Leu, Val, Ile, and Ala, this
suggests that PACE4 tolerates the presence of hydrophobic residues
in position P6 and this opens possibilities to design specific inhibitors.
The synthesized series of ML-peptides validated the differences
between furin and PACE4 in the P5-P8 region. To date, the ML-peptide
is the best PACE4 specific inhibitor described. Although furin and
PACE4 share very identical catalytic domains and an almost identical
catalytic cleft,8,9 our design of the ML-peptide selective
PACE4 inhibitor shows that even with these similarities, both enzymes
have different binding affinities. The results highlight the fact
that furin does not provide nonpolar peptide stabilization in its
catalytic cleft while PACE4 has good binding affinity with both cationic
and nonpolar peptides. To hypothesize on the origin of partial selectivity
between differently charged substrates, a homology model of PACE4
containing peptide Ac-RVKR-cmk in the binding cleft
was built using MODELER 9v8 from crystalline furin 1P8J(31) (Figure 7).
Figure 7
Homology model of PACE4.
Stereoscopic views of (a) mouse furin
crystal catalytic cleft (1P8J) and (b) PACE4 homology model. Asp and Glu negative
charges are shown in red, whereas Arg and Lys positive charges are
shown in blue. Green spheres represent dicationic calcium ions and
decanoyl-RVKR-cmk inhibitor has been modified to
Ac-RVKR-cmk for clarity. The homology model was built
with Modeler 9v6 on a linux platform. (c) Alignment of hfurin and
hPACE4 catalytic domain. Bold letters represent the catalytic triad
D-H-S.
A close examination of the whole catalytic domain
of PCs shows
various degrees of charge excess, as previously reported for other
subtilisins.32 By looking at the number
of positively charged Arg and Lys (i.e., His being mostly neutral
at cytoplasmic pH is left out) and negatively charged Asp and Glu,
the overall total charge calculated for both convertase catalytic
domains are -7 for human furin and 0 for human PACE4 (i.e.,
the catalytic domain of furin goes from N-terminal
prodomain primary cleavage site Asp108 to Val444 and from Gln150 to
Ala496 in PACE4). The active site of both furin and PACE4 also reveals
that the S1, S2, and S4 sites are formed by residues with similar
properties, e.g., Glu257 and Glu230 in furin replace Asp309 and Asp282
in PACE4, respectively (Figure7). On the other
hand, the differences in affinity observed with multiple Leu extension
in the ML-peptide propose the existence of notable differences in
subsite S5 and beyond. To gain a deeper insight of the phenomenon,
it is necessary to dissect the binding cleft of both PCs. One common
feature among all the subtilases is the presence of a groove running
from the catalytic site to helixes a3 and a4 that stabilizes
a peptidic substrate in an antiparallel b-sheet conformation
through an induced fit process. This interaction can also be seen
in the noncatalytic PCSK9 structure (2PMW) between the prodomain and the region
homologous to the catalytic cleft of the other PCs (Ser147 to Gln152).33 Despite the fact that other residues might be
involved, the same trend remains for furin and PACE4: a way of hosting
a peptidic substrate or inhibitor adopting an antiparallel b-sheet.34 On the basis of these data, we propose that
the linear conformation of the peptide brings the P6-P8 residues
of the inhibitor in the vicinity of the residues located at the tip
of helix a4, and this region of the enzyme would represent the
subsites S6, S7, and S8. We also focused our analysis on the disparities
in this region to better understand the specificity observed for ML-peptide
because the solvent accessible residues of helix a4 differ in
PACE4 and furin. From the homology model of PACE4, it appears that
the most critical dissimilarity in the helix a4 comes from the
replacement of acidic residues in furin by either basic or neutral
residues in PACE4 (Glu271 and Glu272 in furin exchanged for Lys323
and Gln324 in PACE4). Consequently, the N-terminal
end of helix a4 has a charge of -1 in furin and +2 in
PACE4. Finally, an intramolecular quench of charges in PACE4 may explain
its potential to complex neutral ligands. Such self-quenching is unlikely
for furin in the N-terminal region of the helix a4.
In sum, the fact that furin catalytic clef is more negatively charged
than PACE4 might very well account for much of the selectivity showed
by the two PCs.
The cellular effects of the ML-peptide are remarkable,
as they
phenocopy the antiproliferation effects observed in our previous molecular
studies knocking down PACE4 in DU145 cells.3 This study also provided additional evidence for the PACE4 targeted
antiproliferation using LNCaP cells. However, the effects of the ML-peptide
are largely ineffective in the PC3 cell lines, as it expresses very
little if any PACE4. As a control, the polybasic peptide Ac-RARRRKKRT-NH2, which is a potent furin
inhibitor35 of similar length, was tested
in the MTT cell-based assays (with LNCaP and DU145 cells) and no antiproliferative
effects could be observed with this peptide (Supporting
Information Figure S2). This negative result shows that furin
inhibition does not affect cell proliferation. We are confident that
the furin target was reached by the peptide, as in a previous study
we showed that this potent furin inhibitor has cell penetration properties.35 Additional control peptides provide evidence
that the ML-peptide indeed targets PACE4 because the Ac-LLLLRVK[DArg]-NH2 shows a substantial loss
of affinity in vitro and is also a poor inhibitor of DU145 and LNCaP
cell proliferation (Figures 4d,e).
PACE4
is localized at the cell surface and in the extracellular
matrix due to interactions between its cycteine-rich domain (CRD),
heparin sulfate proteoglycans (HSPGs),5,36 and tissue
inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs).6 To assess the importance of cell surface PACE4 in tumor progression,
the ML-peptide was modified with N-terminal PEGylation,
significantly reducing its cell penetration property while not affecting
its inhibitory potency (i.e, PEGylated ML-peptide has a similar Ki to the ML-peptide). Because the PEGylated
ML-peptide significantly losses its ability to inhibit DU145 proliferation,
it leads to the conclusion that intracellular PACE4 is required for
this function.
A reduction of cellular proliferation could occur
by a number of
mechanisms downstream of PACE4 inhibition, but most likely a number
of important growth factors which are substrates of PACE4 have lost
their activity due to lack of processing. This general lack of growth
factor activity would eventually have effects on the cell cycle. Therefore,
a cell cycle analysis was performed to evaluate if cell cycle arrest
or slow-down was possible. A dose-dependent accumulation of cells
in G0/G1 phase was observed, thus preventing
cells entry into S phase. The transition between G1 and
S phase is a finely regulated mechanism controlled by a combination
of environmental considerations mostly influenced by the presence
of growth signals and the discontinuation of extracellular inhibitory
signals. This could suggest that the ML-peptide inhibits the processing
of growth factors required to go beyond the restriction point and
therefore triggers a cell cycle arrest at this point. However, while
outside of the scope of the present manuscript, further studies identifying
these substrates and signaling pathways involved will be required.
Nonetheless, various potential substrates have been suggested in various
other studies.37 Of interest was the observation
of apoptosis following an exposure to 200 mM Ac-[DLeu]-LLLRVKR-NH2 in LNCaP cells. This phenomenon
may be easily explained by the fact that cell cycle arrest is usually
poorly tolerated and prolonged cytostasis must be escaped by cell
death.38 If this is true, then more potent
and stable versions of the ML-peptide inhibitor could result in exceptional
drugs that reduce prostate cancer cell proliferation as well as inducing
specific cell death. In the context of the metastasis phase of prostate
cancer, a PACE4 inhibitor has the potential to become an important
therapeutic agent.

Experimental Section
Peptide Synthesis
Synthesis of SP-SPCL peptide library
was performed as described previously (Torrey Pines Institute for
Molecular Studies).23,39 All other peptides were obtained
by solid-phase peptide synthesis (50 mmol scale) on a polystyrene
resin, TentaGel S RAM (Rapp Polymere, capacity 0.23 mmol/g), with
a Pioneer peptide synthesizer (Applied Biosystems), according to standard
coupling procedures and Fmoc strategy.40 The protected amino acids were coupled at 3-fold excess using HATU
as coupling agent in the presence of DIPEA in DMF. The Fmoc groups
were removed by treatment with 20% piperidine in DMF. After the final
Fmoc deprotection, with the exception of FITC-labeled peptides, N-terminal acetylation was carried out in DMF with acetic
anhydride (0.5%) and 2.6-lutidine (0.6%). The FITC-peptides were labeled
with fluorescein isothiocyanate isomer I (FITC) through their N-terminus (b-Ala was used as a spacer for the peptide:
FITC-[b-Ala]-LLLLRVKR-NH2). A 1.5 equiv of FITC in pyridine-DCM (1:4) was added
to the resin and allowed to couple overnight. After completion of
the synthesis, the protected peptidyl resins were treated with TFA-H2O-TIS (95:2.5:2.5) and stirred for 3 h. The solutions
with the released peptides were filtered and evaporated in vacuo to
a volume of about 1 mL. Then the peptides were precipitated with diethyl
ether to afford crude products. The crude compounds were purified
by semipreparative HPLC (Agilent Technologies, 1100 series HPLC equipped
with a diode array detector (DAD)) on reversed-phase support Agilent
C18 column (15 mm, 100 A, 7.8 mm x 300 mm).
The purity of the peptides was controlled using analytical HPLC. A
SELDI-TOF mass spectrometer (Bio-Rad Laboratories) was used to confirm
the identity of the pure products (molecular ion). According to both
HPLC and mass spectrometry, the purity of peptides exceeded 98%. Their
physicochemical properties are presented in Supporting
Information Table S2. The peptide content analyses were performed
in vacuo with a Beckman 120C autoanalyzer following 24 h hydrolysis
in 5.7 N HCl at 110 degC and analyzed using a Varian DS604 system
integrator.
Production of Recombinant PCs and Prodomains
Recombinant
soluble human PCs were produced from S2 insect cells and purified
as previously described.13 Briefly, S2
conditioned medium was purified using ultrafiltration, anion exchange
chromatography, hydrophobic interaction chromatography, and gel filtration.
The prodomains of PCs were produced in One Shot TOP 10 cells (Invitrogen)
transformed with cDNA construct of full-length prosegment. The recombinant
prodomains were purified from bacterial lysate by nickel chromatography
and reverse-phase HPLC as previously described.13
Enzyme Inhibition Assays
Enzyme inhibition assays for
furin were performed in 100 mM Hepes pH 7.5, 1 mM CaCl2, 1 mM b-mercaptoethanol, and 1.8 mg/mL BSA, while assays for
PACE4 were performed in 20 mM Bis-Tis pH 6.5, 1 mM CaCl2, and 1.8 mg/mL BSA. All assays were performed with the substrate
pyroGlu-Arg-Val-Lys-Arg-methyl-coumaryl-7-amide (Bachem, CA) at 100
mM. Assays were carried out at 37 degC for 60 min, and real-time
fluorescence was measured using a Gemini EM 96-well spectrofluorometer
(Molecular Devices, CA) (lEM, 370 nm; lEX., 460 nm; CutOff, 435 nm). Inhibitory peptides and prodomains
were added to the assays at decreasing concentrations to perform a
competitive inhibition assays. Kinetics assays were analyzed using
SoftMaxPro5, and Ki values were determined
from IC50 using Cheng and Prusoff's equation41 with Km values of
4.61 mM for furin and 3.5 mM for PACE4.
PCs mRNA Quantitation
Total RNA was extracted by the
QIAGEN RNA isolation kit (Qiagen). The quality of the total RNA sample
was assessed using an Agilent Bioanalyzer with the RNA Nano Chip (Agilent
Technologies). Briefly, 1 mg RNA was reverse transcribed and
the obtained cDNA was used to carry out qPCR analysis. The primers
used are shown in Supporting Information Table
S3. Relative expression were calculated using b-actin
as a reference gene and the formula (1 + amplification efficiency)
- D(DCT) for each cell line, as described previously.3
Cell Culture and MTT Assays
To perform MTT assays,
both DU145 and PC3 cell lines were seeded at a density of 1500 cells
per well in 96-wells plates. LNCaP cells were seeded at a density
of 2500 cells per well in a poly lysine coated 96-well plate. After
24 h, media was changed and inhibitory peptides were added to the
cells. The peptides were incubated with the cells for 72 h prior to
addition of MTT reagent at a final concentration of 1 mg/mL. MTT reagent
was incubated 4 h with DU145 and LNCaP and 6 h with PC3 cells, and
then media was removed and formazan was solubilized with 100 mL
of 2-propanol-HCl (24:1N). The total metabolic activity was
normalized relatively to vehicle treated cells (Sterile bidistilled
water 0.1% DMSO). Each step of MTT, as well as maintenance of DU145,
LNCaP, and PC3 cells, were carried in RPMI 1640 5% FBS for DU145 and
10% FBS for LNCaP and PC3. IC50 were determined using Prism
5.0 (GraphPad Software).
Cellular Uptake Assays
The uptake of FITC peptides
was tested on DU145 cells and analyzed with a FACScan cytometer (Becton
Dickinson, Mountain View, CA). First, 4 x 105 cells
were incubated 1 h in serum-free RPMI media with 10 mM of FITC-b-Ala-ML,
FITC-[PEG8]-ML, or FITC-[C8]-ML and collected by centrifugation. Then
the cell pellets were washed twice with trypsin (0.05% v/v) during
5 min at 37 degC to remove nonspecific interactions with the membrane.
Cells were incubated 2 min with propidium iodine (10 mg/mL)
in order to exclude cells with altered membrane. A minimum of 10000
events per sample was acquired, excluding cell clumps and debris.
GeoMeans were determined using CellQuest Software (Becton Dickinson,
Mountain View, CA).
Cell Cycle Analyses
To perform cell cycle analyses
on LNCaP, 4 x 105 cells were seeded in 10 cm culture
dishes and grown for 24 h without treatment. Cells were then treated
with vehicle (0.1% DMSO) or with 100 mM or 200 mM of peptides
Ac-LLLLRVKR-NH2 or Ac-[DLeu]LLLRVKR-NH2. Treatments were carried
out in complete medium (10% FBS) for a period of 96 h, and cell media
were changed every 24 h to offset peptide degradation. Cells were
harvested using trypsin, washed once with PBS, resuspended in 0.5
mL of PBS, and fixed by dropwise addition of 1.5 mL of ice-cold ethanol.
After a 30 min incubation at room temperature, cells were washed with
PBS and DNA staining was performed in 20 mM HEPES pH 7.2, 0.16 M NaCl,
and 1 mM EGTA buffer containing 10 mg/mL of RNaseA and 10 mg/mL
of propidium iodine.
Flow cytometry was performed using a FACScan
cytometer (Becton Dickinson, Mountain View, CA) equipped with a 15
mW argon ion laser tuned at 488 nm. A minimum of 10000 gated events
per sample were acquired. Forward and side scatter signals were used
to establish the live gate to exclude debris and cell clumps and a
second live gate was set using the FL3-A and FL3-W parameters of the
doublet discrimination module (DDM), allowing single cell measurements.
The percentages of cells in different phases of cell cycle were calculated
by ModFit software (Verity Software House, Topsham, ME).
