[Abstract, Introduction, Methods, Results, Discussion]

Arylsulfatase B (N-Acetylgalactosamine-4-Sulfatase): Potential Role
as a Biomarker in Prostate Cancer. BACKGROUND The enzyme Arylsulfatase B (ARSB; N-acetylgalactosamine-4-sulfatase) degrades chondroitin-4-sulfate (C4S) and is reduced in malignant colonic and mammary tissues, but has not previously been evaluated in prostate cancer.   METHODS ARSB immunostaining was performed on two tissue microarrays (TMA) and analyzed by digital image analysis, generating ARSB H-scores for prevalence and intensity of epithelial, stromal, and combined epithelial and stromal immunostaining. Also, paired malignant and normal prostate tissues were analyzed for ARSB activity, C4S, total sulfated glycosaminoglycans, and versican content. The quantities of C4S and of the epidermal growth factor receptor that co-immunoprecipitated with versican were determined in the normal and malignant paired prostate tissues.   RESULTS 44 cases of prostate cancer were paired by age (+- 5y), race, Gleason score (in order), and pathologic TNM score. The pairs differed by recurrence vs. non-recurrence of elevated PSA at 4 or more years. When TMA cores were analyzed for ARSB H-score, 18 of the 22 pairs had lower ARSB H-scores in the recurrent member of the pair, whereas higher initial PSA values were associated with recurrence in only 65% of the paired cases. In a second TMA, Gleason scores 6 and 7 were associated with higher ARSB H-scores than Gleason scores 8 and 9 for stroma, epithelium, and stroma and epithelium combined (p=0.052, p=0.015, p<0.0001, respectively) and were inversely correlated (r = -0.98, -0.97, and -0.99, respectively). In other paired normal and malignant prostate tissues, ARSB activity was significantly higher in the normal tissues, and C4S and versican values were lower (p<0.0001). C4S that co-immunoprecipitated with versican was greater in the malignant than in the normal tissue, whereas total EGFR that co-immunoprecipitated with versican was reduced.   DISCUSSION Study findings suggest that ARSB may be useful as a prognostic biomarker in prostate cancer, and that the biological action of ARSB on chondroitin sulfate may impact upon versican's effects in the tumor microenvironment.

Introduction
Arylsulfatase B (ARSB; N-acetylgalactosamine-4-sulfatase) is the lysosomal
enzyme that removes the 4-sulfate group of N-acetylgalactosamine-4-sulfate at the
non-reducing end of chondroitin-4-sulfate (C4S) and dermatan sulfate (DS) and
thereby regulates their degradation [1,2]. Recent studies demonstrated extra-lysosomal
localization of ARSB in epithelial and endothelial membranes in human cells [3-7]. Decline in ARSB activity was shown in malignant mammary and colonic
epithelial tissues and in metastatic colonic epithelial cells [3,8-10], and the intensity and localization of ARSB
immunostaining was reduced in higher grade colonic adenocarcinomas [3]. The current studies were undertaken to
determine if the previously identified reductions in ARSB in malignant mammary and
colonic tissues were also evident in malignant prostate tissue.
Previously, chondroitin sulfate and versican, an extracellular matrix
proteoglycan with chondroitin sulfate attachments, were reported to predict
progression in early-stage prostate cancer and considered as potential biomarkers of
prostate cancer [11,12]. Versican is an important extracellular matrix proteoglycan
composed of three domains: the G1 domain has hyaluronan attachments that interact
with the CD44 cell surface protein; the G2 domain has chondroitin sulfate
attachments; and the G3 domain at the C-terminus has epidermal growth factor
(EGF)-like repeats and a carbohydrate recognition domain [13]. These domains enable versican to interact with multiple
binding partners, including type 1 collagen, tenascin-R, fibronection, P- and
L-selectins, b1-integrins, EGF receptor, and P-selectin glycoprotein
ligand-1 (PSGL-1) [14]. Versican is regarded
as a critical factor affecting the attachment of prostate cancer cells to
fibronectin in the stroma, thereby mediating motility and invasiveness [15]. Since decline in ARSB activity leads
directly to increase in chondroitin sulfation and transcriptionally to increase in
versican expression [8,16], the associations among versican, chondroitin sulfate, and
ARSB are of interest and were addressed in the studies in this report.
Although prostate specific antigen (PSA) has been widely used as a biomarker
of prostate cancer, the benefits of screening by PSA remain controversial and a
better prognostic marker of prostate cancer has been the subject of considerable
investigation [17,18]. In this report, the potential role of ARSB as a biomarker
of prostatic malignancy was considered. Measurements of the intensity of ARSB
immunostaining by digitized image analysis (H-scores) were calculated for prostate
cancers in two small tissue microarrays (TMA) and the associations of H-scores with
recurrence vs. non-recurrence and Gleason score were determined. In addition, ARSB
enzyme activity, C4S, and versican were compared between normal and malignant
regions from radical prostatectomies performed for prostate cancer. The study data
that follow suggest that further evaluation of ARSB as a biomarker and possible
tumor suppressor in prostate cancer is warranted.

Materials and Methods
Cancer tissue arrays and tissue samples
Prostate cancer tissues from three sources were analyzed. These included
a cancer tissue microarray (TMA) obtained from the National Disease Research
Interchange (NDRI, Philadelphia, PA) which included 30 cores with Gleason scores
from 6-9. A second cancer tissue array from the Cooperative Prostate
Cancer Tissue Resource (CPCTR; from A. K.-B.) included 22 pairs of cases that
varied by biochemical recurrence (increased PSA) vs. non-recurrence after four
or more years, and were matched by age +- 5 y, race, Gleason score
matched by sequence and score, treatment (radical prostatectomy), and pathologic
TNM stage [19]. Also, fresh frozen
tissues from nine prostatectomies for prostate cancer were obtained from the
University of Illinois at Chicago (UIC) Tissue Bank under a protocol approved by
the Institutional Review Board and the Cancer Center of UIC. Frozen sections
were performed and benign and malignant foci, consisting of epithelium and
stroma, were identified by two observers (G.G and L. F.), isolated, dissected
out, and frozen for subsequent analysis, as described below.
Arylsulfatase B immunostaining and digitized image analysis
Tissue microarray (TMA) slides were hydrated using xylene and an alcohol
gradient and rinsed in distilled water. Antigen unmasking was performed with a
10X concentrated retrieval solution by Dako (DakoCytomation, Carpenteria, CA),
according to the manufacturer's instructions, then slides were rinsed in
phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) for 5 minutes. Endogenous peroxidase activity
was blocked by H202 blocking reagent for 10 minutes at
room temperature, then the TMA slides were treated with a protein blocking
solution for 10 minutes at room temperature, rinsed and incubated with
arylsulfatase B polyclonal rabbit antiserum (Open Biosystems, ThermoFisher
Scientific, Huntsville, AL; 1:100) or negative IgG control for 30 minutes at
room temperature. Slides were rinsed and then treated with EnVision Plus labeled
polymer (DakoCytomation) for 30 minutes at room temperature. DAB Plus
(DakoCytomation) was used for 10 minutes to detect ARSB, and slides were rinsed
in distilled water, counterstained with hematoxylin, dehydrated through an
alcohol gradient and mounted with Permount. The TMA slides were digitally
scanned at 20x magnification on an Aperio ScanScope(r) CS (Aperio
Technologies, Inc., Vista, CA) using the Aperio ImageScope program
(v10.0.35.1800) and loaded into Spectrum version 11.1. Other prostate cancer and
normal tissue sections from frozen tissue were immunostained with ARSB
polyclonal antibody. Negative IgG controls were also prepared and imaged.
The TMA slides were digitally scanned at 20x magnification on an Aperio
ScanScope(r) CS (Aperio Technologies, Inc., Vista, CA) using the Aperio
ImageScope program (v10.0.35.1800) and loaded into Spectrum version 11.1. The
TMA Lab(r) software module was used to segment the TMAs into individual
cores, while the Genie(r) module was used to map distinct epithelial and
stromal regions within each core [20].
Genie(r) is a machine learning program that classifies each pixel in an
image according to a set of hand-drawn, pre-classified training images provided
by a skilled human operator. For this study, we created three classes:
epithelial, stromal, and no-tissue, using 16, 7 and 1 training images
respectively. The resulting classifier algorithm, which was determined to be
highly accurate in classifying pixels within the training set of images, was
then applied to the entire TMAs. Once epithelial and stromal regions were
mapped, it was possible to score staining solely within epithelial or stromal
compartments or in combination. The Positive Pixel Count(r) (Aperio, Inc.)
algorithm was used within the epithelial and stromal compartments to measure
brown chromogen staining in each relevant pixel at four ordinal intensity
levels, from 0 to 3. The H-score, an index that combines stain prevalence and
intensity, was determined based on the proportion of weakly, moderately and
strongly stained pixels in each core using the formula: (% weak
x 1 + % moderate x 2 + % strong x 3) /
100.
The H-scores were calculated independently for the NDRI and CPCTR cores.
Mean H-score +- standard deviation (S.D.) for Gleason scores 6-9
in the NDRI TMA was calculated. The H-scores for the recurrent vs. non-recurrent
member of the paired samples in the CPCTR were compared. When multiple cores
from the same surgery were present on an array, the H-scores for the cores were
averaged, and the average value used in subsequent analysis. Each TMA core was
reviewed visually before scoring to exclude artifacts or missing tissue, and
again after scoring. No gross discrepancies with the automated scoring were
identified.
Arylsulfatase B activity assay and Western blot
Tissue homogenates were prepared from the normal and malignant foci
isolated from the prostatectomies performed at UIC. Arylsulfatase B (ARSB)
activity was determined using a fluorometric assay and the exogenous substrate
4-methylumbeliiferyl sulfate, as previously detailed [10]. Briefly, 20 ul of tissue homogenate and 80
ul of assay buffer (0.05 M Na acetate buffer, pH 5.6) were combined with
100 ul of substrate (5mM 4-MUS in assay buffer) in wells of a
microplate. After incubation for 30 minutes 37degC, the reaction was
stopped by 150 ul of stop buffer (Glycine-Carbonate buffer) at pH 10.7,
and fluorescence was measured at 360 nm (excitation) and 465 nm (emission) in a
microplate reader (FLUOstar, BMG, Cary, NC). ARSB activity was expressed as
nmol/mg protein/hour, based on a standard curve for ARSB activity prepared with
known quantities of 4-methylumbilleferyl at pH 5.6. Protein content of the
tissue homogenate was determined by total protein assay kit (Pierce, Thermo
Fisher Scientific, Inc., Rockford, IL).
Western blot for ARSB was performed using paired normal and malignant
prostate tissue samples from three of the UIC cases. Tissue lysates were
prepared from prostate tissue with cell lysis buffer (Cell Signaling Technology,
Inc., Danvers, MA) and protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Halt(tm)
Protease and Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail, Thermo Scientific, Pittsburgh, PA).
Western blot of ARSB was performed on 10% SDS gel with ARSB antibody, as
above, and b-actin (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA, USA). An
ARSB inhibitory peptide, composed of the sequence which was used to generate the
antibody, was added to three of the wells to show the specificity of the ARSB
band. The sequence of the inhibitory peptide used in the Western blot was:
RLQFYHKHSVPVYFPAQDPR (NP_15848.1; AA: 501-520). Immunoreactive bands
were visualized using enhanced chemiluminescence (Amersham, GE Healthcare,
Piscataway, NJ, USA). Density of the ARSB was compared to b-actin in the
malignant and normal samples.
Measurement of sulfated glycosaminoglycans
Total sulfated glycosaminoglycan (GAG) content in normal and malignant
prostate tissues was measured using the substrate 1,9-dimethylmethylene blue
(Blyscan(tm), Biocolor Ltd., Newtownabbey, Northern Ireland), which detects
chondroitin-4-sulfate, chondroitin-6-sulfate, dermatan sulfate, keratan sulfate,
heparan sulfate, and heparin, but does not detect unsulfated glycosaminoglycans
or disaccharides [3-5,21]. The substrate 1,9-dimethylmethylene blue combines with the sulfate
groups of the sulfated GAG and detects the sulfated polysaccharide component of
proteoglycans and the protein-free sulfated GAG chains. Tissue lysates were
prepared using RIPA buffer (50 mmol/L Tris-HCl containing 0.15 mol/L NaCl,
1% Nonidet P40, 0.5% deoxycholic acid and 0.1% SDS, pH
7.4). Absorbance maximum of 1,9-dimethylmethylene blue was detected at 656 nm
(FLUOstar), and sulfated GAG concentration expressed as ug/mg of protein
of tissue lysate.
Immunoprecipitation of tissue lysates by chondroitin-4-sulfate
antibody
Tissue lysates were prepared using RIPA buffer, as above. Antibody
specific to native chondroitin-4-sulfate (C4S; 4D1, Abnova, Littleton, CO) was
previously tested by the recovery of pure C4S following immunoprecipitation with
the C4S antibody (1 ug) and shown to be 93.3 +- 2.7%
[8]. Cross-reactivity of the antibody
with CS-E or C6S was excluded by similar tests. The C4S antibody (1
ug/mg of cell lysate protein) was added to the prostate cell lysates in
tubes, and tubes were rotated overnight in a shaker at 4degC. Next, 100
ul of pre-washed Protein L-agarose (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa
Cruz, CA) was added to each tube, and tubes were incubated overnight at 4
degC. Subsequently, the beads were washed three times with
phosphate-buffered saline containing Protease Inhibitor Mixture, and the
precipitate was eluted with dye-free elution buffer and subjected to C4S
antibody measurement by Blyscan assay, as described above [8].
Determination of versican by competitive ELISA
Human versican was measured by a competitive ELISA (My BioSource, San
Diego, CA), in which color development was inversely proportional to the
versican content in the test samples. Standards, ranging from 1 to 25 ng/ml
(ug/L), tissue samples, and versican-horseradish peroxidase conjugate
were added to wells pre-coated with versican antibody, incubated for 1 hour at
37degC, and washed three times. Color was developed by adding hydrogen
peroxide/ tetramethylbenzidine (TMB) substrate. The reaction was stopped by 2N
sulfuric acid, and the color was read at 450 nm in a plate reader (BMG). The
concentration of versican in the samples was extrapolated from the standard
curve and expressed per mg of total tissue protein, measured by protein assay
(Pierce).
Measurement of total EGFR by ELISA
Total human epidermal growth factor receptor (phosphorylated and
unphosphorylated EGFR and ErbB1) was measured in the tissue extract using a
standardized ELISA (R&D, Minneapolis, MN). Total EGFR in the samples was
captured in the wells of microtiter plates that were pre-coated with specific
capture antibody. The immobilized total EGFR was detected by a biotinylated
second EGFR, and Streptavidin-hydrogen peroxidase (HRP) was added. The bound
enzyme activity was determined by chromogenic substrate [(hydrogen
peroxide/tetramethylbenzidine (TMB)], and color development due to HRP activity
was stopped by 2N sulfuric acid. Intensity of color was measured at 450 nm in a
plate reader (BMG), and the values of the samples were extrapolated from a
standard curve and normalized using the total tissue protein concentration as
measured by protein assay (Pierce).
Measurement of C4S immunoprecipitated with versican
Versican was immunoprecipitated from tissue lysates using versican
antibody (V0 isoform; SCBT, Santa Cruz, CA) covalently bound to Dynabeads (Life
Technologies, Carlsbad, CA). Total versican concentration in the
immunoprecipitate was determined by competitive ELISA as described above.
Prostate cancer samples were diluted by 50% in diluent to bring versican
to approximately the same concentration as in the normal tissue
immunoprecipitates. Blyscan assay for C4S was conducted as described above to
detect the C4S that co-immunoprecipitated with versican.
Immunohistochemistry of chondroitin-4-sulfate
Tissue sections were prepared from the frozen normal and malignant
prostate tissues and immunostained with chondroitin-4-sulfate (C4S) mouse
monoclonal antibody (4D1 clone, SCBT; 1:100). Sections were incubated with
primary antibody or IgG negative control overnight at 4degC, then washed,
then incubated with secondary antibody which was conjugated with HRP for 1 h at
room temperature. Color was developed following wash with 3,3-diaminobenzidine
and counterstained with hematoxylin. Digitized images were obtained with
QCapture software (QImaging, Surrey, BC, Canada) at 20X magnification.
Background color was modified with GIMP Portable software (Portable Apps, New
York, NY).
Statistics
Results are expressed as mean +- Standard Deviation. Statistical
significance of differences in H-scores between paired samples that varied by
recurrence vs. non-recurrence and association between H-scores and Gleason
scores was determined using Instat (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA) by either
paired or unpaired t-tests, two-tailed, or by one-way analysis of variance,
followed by the Tukey-Kramer post-test to correct for multiple comparisons.
Paired t-tests were performed with 6 pair of normal and malignant biological
samples using averages of technical duplicates of each measurement. P-value of
less than 0.05 was considered statistically significant. One asterisk represents
p< 0.05, ** represents p<0.01, *** p<0.001, and ****
p<0.0001.

Results
Lower Arylsulfatase B H-score predicts recurrence in paired cancer
cases
Prostate cancer cases in the CPCTR array were paired for age +- 5
years, race, treatment intervention, Gleason scores (in same sequence), and
pathological TNM stage, and were differentiated only by biochemical (elevated
PSA) recurrence vs. non-recurrence after 4 or more years of followup.
Arylsulfatase B (ARSB; N-acetylgalactosamine-4-sulfatase) immunostaining of the
tissue microarray containing 22 pairs of cores from prostatectomies was
performed. ARSB H-scores for epithelium, stroma, and combined epithelium and
stroma were determined by digitized image analysis for each case, and were
compared between the recurrent and non-recurrent members of the pairs.
82% (18/22) of the pairs had higher H-scores for the non-recurrence than
for recurrence using the combined stroma and epithelium ARSB H-score (Table 1). In contrast, initial PSA values
were lower in only 65% (13/20) of the recurrences, making the PSA in
this sample less effective as a predictor of recurrence than the ARSB H-score.
The combination of higher ARSB H-score and lower PSA value predicted 95%
(21/22) of the recurrences.
Mean ARSB H-score for recurrence for combined stroma and epithelium was
0.28 +- 0.26 and for non-recurrence was 0.62 +- 0.28. By paired
t-test, the difference in ARSB H-scores was highly significant for combined
(p=0.0006, paired t-test, two-tailed), for epithelium (p=0.0003), and for stroma
(p=0.0021) (Fig. 1A). ARSB H-scores less
than 0.25 for combined predicted recurrence with 100% specificity, and
H-scores greater than 0.70 for combined were highly predictive of non-recurrence
(Fig. 1B). Overlap between the scores
for recurrence and non-recurrence was evident between 0.25 and 0.70, and over
50% (23/44) of the cases were in this range.
Inverse association between ARSB immunostaining and Gleason score
Mean ARSB H-scores for cores on the NDRI array were calculated and
associated with the corresponding Gleason scores. 11 cores were designated
Gleason 6, 6 were Gleason 7, 8 were Gleason 8, and 5 were Gleason 9. Mean ARSB
H-scores were compared between Gleason scores 6+7 and Gleason scores 8+9 for
stroma, epithelium, and combined epithelium and stroma and found to be
significant (p=0.052, p=0.015, and p<0.0001, respectively, unpaired
t-test, two-tailed) (Fig. 2A).
Representative images demonstrate greater intensity of ARSB immunostaining for
Gleason scores 6 and 7 compared to scores 8 and 9 (Fig. 2B-2E). The ARSB positive epithelial cell membrane becomes
increasingly less continuous and more punctate with increasing Gleason score.
Overall intensity of stromal and epithelial staining declined with increasing
Gleason score. Representative TMA cores demonstrate positive staining for ARSB
(Fig. 2F) and negative staining with
IgG control (Fig. 2G).
Linear regression analysis demonstrated inverse correlations for ARSB
H-scores and Gleason scores (7-9) for combined epithelium and stroma,
epithelium, and stroma (Fig. 2H). The
r-values were -0.99, -0.97, and -0.98, respectively.
Reduced ARSB associated with increased sulfated glycosaminoglycans and
chondroitin-4-sulfate in malignant prostatic tissue compared to normal
Western blot demonstrated greater ARSB in the normal than in the
malignant prostate tissue (Fig. 3A). The
ARSB inhibitory peptide, composed of the epitope to which the antibody was
developed, completely blocked the appearance of the ARSB band, demonstrating the
specificity of the antibody. B-actin band demonstrated equal loading.
Densitometry confirms the visual impression (Fig.
3B) and indicates significant differences between intensity of bands
between normal and malignant tissue and inhibition by ARSB inhibitory
peptide.
In the paired normal and malignant fresh frozen tissue samples obtained
from the UIC Tissue Bank from radical prostatectomies performed as initial
treatment for localized prostate cancer, PSA at diagnosis ranged from 4.3 to
25.4 ng/ml (ug/L), and Gleason scores ranged from 6-9. In these
samples, the ARSB activity in the malignant prostate tissue was
~50% of the value in the normal tissue. Mean ARSB activity in
the normal tissue was 139.3 +- 13.4 nmol/mg protein/h, compared to 76.1
+- 7.1 ng/mg protein/h in the malignant tissue (p<0.0001, paired
t-test, two-tailed) (Fig. 3C).
Since decline in ARSB activity leads to reduced degradation of
chondroitin 4-sulfate (C4S), the content of C4S and total sulfated
glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) were measured in the normal and malignant prostate
samples. C4S was significantly increased in the malignant prostate tissue,
compared to the normal tissue (p<0.0001, paired t-test, two-tailed)
(Fig. 3D). The mean difference in C4S
content between the malignant and normal paired samples was almost 6
ug/mg total protein, and accounted for 81% of the increase in
the total sulfated GAGs in the malignant tissue compared to the normal tissue.
Immunohistochemistry of C4S also demonstrates less intense staining of C4S
staining in the normal (Fig. 3E), compared
to the malignant prostate tissue (Fig. 3F),
consistent with the decline in ARSB in the malignant tissue and the resultant
increase in C4S. IgG control staining is negative (Fig. 3G).
Versican increased in malignant prostate tissue
Versican, an extracellular matrix proteoglycan with chondroitin sulfate
attachments, has previously been considered as a biomarker of prostate cancer.
Measurements of versican showed significant increases in versican in the
malignant prostate tissues, compared to levels in the normal tissues. The mean
value of the increase between the malignant and the normal paired tissues was
119.4 ng/mg protein, an increase of more than 76% over the baseline
(p<0.0001, paired t-test, two-tailed) (Fig. 4A).
The G2 domain of versican has sites where chondroitin sulfate attaches,
and versican isoforms with differences in these attachment sites have been
associated with changes in cell proliferation and apoptosis [22]. To determine if the amount of C4S
associated with versican differed between the normal and malignant prostate
tissue, the C4S that co-immunoprecipitated with versican was measured. In the
malignant tissue, C4S increased to 2.6 times the level in the normal prostate
tissue (Fig. 4B). This increase is
consistent with the marked decline in ARSB activity and the overall increase in
C4S content in the malignant tissue. Levels of versican and
chondroitin-4-sulfate directly correlated in both the normal and malignant
prostate tissues, with lower values for the normal tissue and higher values for
the malignant tissue (r = 0.94).
Decline in total EGFR that co-immunoprecipitates with versican in malignant
prostate tissue
Specific versican isoforms and overexpression of specific domains of
versican have been reported to impact on cell proliferation and EGF-EGF receptor
(EGFR) signaling. Particular attention has been focused on the two epidermal
growth factor (EGF)-like motifs in the G3 domain at the C-terminus [23-26]. To detect if there were changes in the EGFR in the malignant
vs. the normal prostate tissue, the EGFR was quantified by ELISA. In contrast to
the increase in C4S that co-immunoprecipitated with versican in the malignant
compared to the normal prostate tissue (above), the EGFR that
co-immunoprecipitated with versican in the malignant tissue declined to 17.6
+- 1.0% of the value in the normal tissue (Fig. 5A). In contrast, the total EGFR in the malignant
tissue increased to over three times the baseline value (Fig. 5B). These results suggest that the increased C4S bound
with versican in malignant prostate tissue may impede the binding of the stromal
versican EGF-like repeats with epithelial EGFR. The overall increase of EGFR in
the malignant tissue suggests that more EGFR may be available for interaction
with endogenous EGF, leading to effects on cell proliferation.

Discussion
This is the first report of decline in ARSB in prostatic malignancy. The
study findings are consistent with a role for ARSB in the determination of the
composition of the tumor microenvironment and suggest that decline in ARSB activity
contributes to the malignant phenotype, as we have previously reported in other
epithelial tissues [3, 8-10]. Study data
suggest that ARSB may be useful as a biomarker of prostate cancer. In 82% of
paired cases, the biochemical recurrences had lower ARSB immunostaining at the time
of prostatectomy. This contrasts with the results for PSA, since PSA values were
higher in only 65%. ARSB immunostaining, determined by digitized analysis,
was inversely associated with Gleason scores for epithelial and stromal compartments
separately and in combination. Also, when ARSB activity was determined in normal and
malignant regions of prostatectomies, ARSB activity was significantly less in the
malignant compared to normal tissue. In association with reduced ARSB activity,
total sulfated glycosaminoglycans and chondroitin-4-sulfate content were increased
in the malignant prostatic tissue, and the chondroitin-4-sulfate containing matrix
proteoglycan versican was also increased. The chondroitin-4-sulfate that
co-immunoprecipitated with versican (V0 isoform) was increased in the malignant
prostate tissue, whereas the total EGFR that co-immunoprecipitated with versican
declined.
Versican was previously reported as a biomarker of prostate malignancy, and
increases in versican and in chondroitin sulfate have been identified as predictors
of disease progression by other investigators [11,12]. This report suggests that
the decline in ARSB activity and the associated increase in C4S may impact on
versican-associated processes in the stroma and on the stromal-epithelial
interactions. By presenting and recruiting molecules to the epithelial cell surface,
stromal versican can interact with epithelial cell surface receptors and can
modulate signaling pathways, including the EGF-EGFR pathway, since two epidermal
growth factor (EGF)-like motifs are located at the C-terminus of the G3 domain of
versican [13-14,22-27]. The interaction of the versican EGF-like
repeats with the epithelial cell EGFR has been reported to affect EGFR signaling and
to influence malignant growth and invasiveness. Other work has shown that exogenous
EGF influenced prostatic cancer behavior, including the migration of malignant cells
to metastatic sites, cell cycle activation through Cyclin D1, and invasiveness
through the urokinase-type plasminogen activator (uPA) pathway [28-30]. Study findings suggest that increased chondroitin sulfate may
inhibit the interaction of the versican EGF-like repeats with the endogenous EGFR,
and may have consequences for development of the malignant phenotype and/or
invasiveness.
Further studies are required to determine the usefulness of ARSB as an
effective biomarker of prostate cancer aggressiveness, and the combination of ARSB
and PSA may be more informative than either test alone. Analysis of larger databases
with outcome data will enable clarification if measurements of ARSB activity or ARSB
immunohistochemical scores can help to predict recurrence and severity of disease.
Specific cutoffs for ARSB H-scores or for ARSB activity may become associated with
recurrence or non-recurrence. Standardization of H-scores may be difficult, since
variation in the range of H-scores was present in the two small arrays analyzed in
this report. Potentially, microgram quantities of tumor tissue from biopsy samples
can be studied to determine ARSB activity and to correlate activity with outcome
data. Since ARSB treatment is used safely and effectively for replacement in
Mucopolysaccharidosis VI [31], a therapeutic
role for ARSB in prostate cancer may emerge in the future.
