[Abstract, Results, Discussion, Methods]

PTPL1 and PKCd contribute to proapoptotic signalling in prostate cancer cells. PTPL1 is a non-receptor protein tyrosine phosphatase involved in apoptosis regulation, although controversial findings have been reported in different cancer types. We report here a proapoptotic role for PTPL1 in PC3 and LNCaP prostate cancer cells, as its absence induces apoptosis resistance upon treatment with different drugs. In PC3 cells, PTPL1 silencing by small interfering RNA influences the expression levels of Bcl-xL and Mcl-1S proteins as well as final events in the apoptotic process such as activation of caspases and caspase-mediated cleavage of proteins like Mcl-1 or poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase. We have identified PKCd as an intermediary of PTPL1-mediated apoptotic signalling and that phosphorylation status of NF-kB and IkBa is influenced by PTPL1 and PKCd. Furthermore, the loss of PTPL1 and PKCd expression in poorly differentiated, more aggressive human prostate cancers also indicate that their absence could be related to apoptosis resistance and tumour progression.

Results
PEITC sensitizes PC3 cells to anti-Fas induced apoptosis
As previously established,10, 11, 12 PC3 cells are sensitive to PEITC-mediated apoptosis and our experiments also confirm this issue (Figure 1). Data regarding anti-Fas sensitivity of PC3 cells are more controversial,14, 15, 16 but they were relatively sensitive to anti-Fas treatment, as it produces a slight induction of apoptosis. However, when cells were pre-treated with PEITC for 1 h and then anti-Fas antibody was added, we observed a significantly more extensive apoptosis than with either PEITC or anti-Fas alone. poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) and caspase-7 cleavage were clearly more pronounced in PC3 cells treated with PEITC and anti-Fas in combination, followed by cells treated with PEITC alone and then by cells treated with anti-Fas alone (Figure 1). Thus, simultaneous treatment with PEITC and anti-Fas causes a more extensive apoptosis in PC3 cells than any of the drugs separately.
PTPL1 silencing abrogates apoptosis induction in PC3 cells
We sought to investigate the influence of PTPL1 expression on the sensitivity to apoptosis of PC3 cells. Figure 2a shows knockdown of endogenous PTPL1 by small interfering RNA (siRNA), at both the mRNA and protein levels. As observed by PARP cleavage (Figure 2b), PC3 cells silenced for PTPL1 showed less sensitivity to apoptosis than siRNA control cells. The effect was seen either with PEITC or anti-Fas alone or with both drugs but again it was more striking when PEITC and anti-Fas were used in combination. Then, several proteins involved in apoptosis were examined (Figure 2c). Caspases 3, 7, and 9 were more active in siRNA control cells treated with PEITC and anti-Fas than in treated siRNA PTPL1 cells. Multidomain proapoptotic proteins Bax and Bak remain unchanged in the presence or absence of PTPL1; however, anti-apoptotic Bcl-xL is increased in PC3 cells silenced for PTPL1 (P<0.05). Remarkably, we observed an increase in the proapoptotic short form of Mcl-1 (Mcl-1S) in siRNA control cells treated with PEITC and anti-Fas, and the appearance of the 24-kDa cleaved fragment of Mcl-1L was also more evident in this condition. All these data are in accordance with the greater sensitivity to apoptosis of PC3 cells expressing endogenous PTPL1. To test whether the protective effect of PTPL1 silencing on apoptosis also occurred with other stimuli, siRNA control and siRNA PTPL1 PC3 cells were treated with PEITC alone or paclitaxel. Cells silenced for PTPL1 were more resistant to PEITC and paclitaxel-induced apoptosis than siRNA control cells, as observed by the cleaved fragments of PARP and caspases 3, 7, and 9 (Figures 3a and c). Annexin V binding/PI assays also confirmed these data (Figures 3b and d). All these data point towards a proapoptotic role for PTPL1 in PC3 cells.
Signal transduction regulated by PTPL1 involves PKCd
Following an initial screening of kinases (data not shown), we focus on protein kinase C delta (PKCd) and a diminished PKCd phosphorylation was detected at T505 (located within the activation loop of the kinase) in cells with endogenous PTPL1 treated with PEITC and anti-Fas, undergoing apoptosis. On the contrary, cells silenced for PTPL1 treated in the same way, with impaired apoptosis, sustained the basal level of PKCd T505 phosphorylation. The decrease in the phosphorylation of PKCd at T505 occurs in PC3 cells expressing endogenous PTPL1 treated with PEITC and anti-Fas, PEITC or paclitaxel and was not primarily due to downregulation of PKCd expression (Figures 4a and b). As reported, PKCd is a functional kinase even without T505 phosphorylation17, 18 and to study more profoundly the involvement of PTPL1-dependent PKCd regulation in apoptosis; an approach was performed using simultaneous PTPL1 and PKCd silencing. First, flow cytometry shows that percentage of apoptotic cells was higher in PEITC and anti-Fas-treated siRNA control cells than in any other condition (45.2% in treated siRNA control cells versus 26.7% in treated siRNA PKCd cells, 17.5% in treated siRNA PTPL1 cells and 10.5% in treated siRNA PKCd and PTPL1 cells) (Figure 5a). These data were confirmed by diminished cleavage of PARP and caspases 3, 7, and 9 in all treated siRNA conditions (Figure 5b). Thus, interestingly, PKCd siRNA, in the same way as PTPL1 silencing, induces apoptosis resistance upon treatment; moreover, simultaneous PTPL1 and PKCd silencing, produces greater resistance to apoptosis than either PTPL1 or PKCd silencing alone. To further confirm the apoptosis resistance obtained in siRNA PKCd cells treated with PEITC and anti-Fas, PC3 cells were silenced with PKCd siRNA and treated with PEITC alone or paclitaxel. Annexin V binding/PI assays showed decreased apoptosis upon PKCd silencing after treatment with both drugs (Supplementary Figure S1).
It has been reported that a mutant PKCd unable to become phosphorylated in the activation loop lacks the capacity to induce NF-kB reporter activation,18 so the activation status of NF-kB was determined, measured by the phosphorylation of S276 of the p65 subunit, a phosphorylation known to be important for optimal transactivation activity of NF-kB.19 Cells silenced for PKCd or both PTPL1 and PKCd maintain, approximately, the same level of NF-kB S276 phosphorylation either in untreated or in PEITC and anti-Fas-treated cells, whereas its phosphorylation level shows a slight decrease in treated PTPL1-silenced cells and is pronouncedly diminished in treated cells expressing endogenous PTPL1 and PKCd. Total level of NF-kB protein remains unaffected (Figure 5b). To test whether these changes in the activation status of NF-kB after PEITC and anti-Fas treatment were accompanied by changes in the subcellular distribution of the protein, an immunofluorescence assay was performed (Supplementary Figure S2). PEITC and anti-Fas treated siRNA control cells shows cytosolic staining, whereas treated siRNA PTPL1 and siRNA PKCd cells show a redistribution of the protein from cytosol to the nucleus, according to the higher activation of NF-kB found in these conditions in relation to siRNA control cells.
Then, we focused on IkBa, another regulator of NF-kB activity. IkBa serine phosphorylation on residues 32 and 36 results in its proteolytic degradation and NF-kB activation.20
Figure 5b shows that IkBa phosphorylation on S32 and S36 presents the major decrease in PC3 cells expressing endogenous PTPL1 and PKCd treated with PEITC and anti-Fas, whereas dephosphorylation is impaired in treated cells silenced for PKCd, PTPL1, or both PTPL1 and PKCd. IkBa phosphorylation at Y42 also leads to IkBa dissociation from NF-kB,20 so its phosphorylation level was also assessed. Y42 phosphorylated IkBa also shows a major decrease in treated cells expressing PTPL1 and PKCd than in any other condition tested. IkBa total level does not show noticeable changes.
Finally, Akt phosphorylation status was also addressed in this setting. There was a noticeable diminishing of Akt phosphorylation on S473 in PC3 cells silenced for PTPL1, but the treatment with PEITC and anti-Fas induced a decrease in Akt phosphorylation irrespective of the presence or absence of PTPL1 or PKCd (Figure 5b).
PTPL1 or PKCd overexpression enhances apoptosis induction in PC3 cells
Next, PC3 cells were transfected with a plasmid containing PTPL1 or PKCd and they were subsequently treated with PEITC and anti-Fas. Annexin V binding/PI assays showed an increase in apoptotic cells in both drug-treated PTPL1 and PKCd-transfected cells (46.4% in treated empty vector-transfected cells versus 54.9% in treated PTPL1 transfected cells and 65.6% in treated PKCd transfected cells) (Figure 6a). In line with this result, the increase in PTPL1 expression significantly enhanced PARP cleavage upon treatment (Figure 6b) (P<0.05). PKCd-transfected PC3 cells treated in the same way also showed more PARP cleavage than empty vector-transfected cells (Figure 6b) (P<0.05). NF-kB phosphorylation was almost undetectable in treated PTPL1 or PKCd-transfected PC3 cells (Figure 6b), supporting siRNA results. Then, PC3 cells were simultaneously transfected with PTPL1 and silenced for PKCd, and treated with PEITC and anti-Fas, to test whether the increased apoptosis obtained after PTPL1 transfection could be reversed by PKCd silencing. As observed in Figure 6c, PARP cleavage decreases in treated cells transfected with PTPL1 and silenced for PKCd, as compared with PTPL1-transfected cells, highlighting again the relevance of PKCd in PTPL1-mediated signalling in this cell line. Finally, to test whether the increase in apoptosis observed in PEITC and anti-Fas-treated PTPL1 or PKCd-transfected cells also occurs with other stimuli, transfected cells were treated with paclitaxel. Both paclitaxel-treated PTPL1 and PKCd-transfected cells showed increased PARP cleavage after treatment (Supplementary Figure S3).
PTPL1 or PKCd silencing induces apoptosis resistance in LNCaP cells
To ascertain whether these findings could be extended to another prostate cancer cell line, PTPL1 and PKCd were downregulated by siRNA in LNCaP cells. Silenced cells were then treated with PEITC and anti-Fas and apoptosis induction was assessed by PARP cleavage (Figure 7). PTPL1-silenced LNCaP cells were more resistant to apoptosis induction than siRNA control cells, with differences in PARP cleavage being statistically significant (P<0.05) (Figure 7a). LNCaP cells silenced for PKCd also showed apoptosis resistance after treatment (P<0.05) (Figure 7b). Next, we examined NF-kB activation status in this setting to test whether PTPL1 and PKCd influence NF-kB signalling. NF-kB phosphorylation was diminished in both treated siRNA PTPL1 and PKCd cells, in a similar way as treated siRNA control cells (Figure 7b); thus, PTPL1 and PKCd do not seem to influence NF-kB phosphorylation in this cell line. Then, the same experimental approach but using paclitaxel was performed. Both paclitaxel-treated PTPL1 and PKCd silenced cells show diminished PARP cleavage, as compared with treated siRNA control cells (Supplementary Figure S4), but differences were only statistically significant in the case of siRNA PKCd cells (P<0.05).
PTPL1 and PKCd immunohistochemical expression in prostate cancer tissues
We performed an immunohistochemical analysis of PTPL1 and PKCd expression in 76 prostate cancer biopsies (Figure 8). Tumour glands showed different degrees of cytoplasmic immunostaining for PTPL1. Well-differentiated, low Gleason score tumours showed strong PTPL1 positivity, whereas poorly differentiated, high Gleason score tumours were either weakly or not immunostained. Statistical analysis showed a significant association (P<0.05) between PTPL1 immunohistochemical expression and Gleason score. Immunostaining for PKCd showed a similar pattern as well-differentiated, low Gleason score tumours showed significantly higher levels of PKCd expression than poorly differentiated, high Gleason score tumours (P<0.01).

Discussion
Several studies have demonstrated that different compounds can sensitize prostate cancer cells to Fas-induced apoptosis.15, 21, 22 In the case of PEITC, a sensitizing effect on Fas-mediated apoptosis has been reported in T24 bladder cancer cells and in Jurkat cells overexpressing Bcl-2.23 We have observed that the treatment with PEITC also sensitizes PC3 cells to anti-Fas induced apoptosis and that the extent of apoptosis caused by this treatment was higher than that achieved with any of the compounds alone. Protein tyrosine phosphorylation is a major regulator of signal transduction in higher eukaryotes.4 PTPL1 is the largest non-receptor protein tyrosine phosphatase and its function in apoptosis regulation is a matter of debate. There is some evidence suggesting that PTPL1 may act as a negative regulator of apoptosis and as a tumour promoting gene, while other studies point towards a role for PTPL1 as a positive regulator of apoptosis and as a tumour suppressor.4 Specifically in prostate cancer, two studies concerning sensitivity to Fas-mediated apoptosis of prostate cancer cell lines failed to find a correlation between resistance to Fas-mediated apoptosis and increased expression of PTPL1 at the mRNA level,15, 16 but functional studies are lacking in prostate cancer addressing the role of PTPL1 in apoptosis. In this study, we have determined a proapoptotic role for PTPL1 in PC3 prostate cancer cells, as its overexpression promotes apoptosis in cells treated with PEITC and anti-Fas simultaneously or paclitaxel and its downregulation induces apoptosis resistance upon treatment with these agents. Interestingly, PTPL1 silencing is also associated with diminished apoptosis in LNCaP cells treated with PEITC and anti-Fas.
In the case of siRNA control and siRNA PTPL1 PC3 cells treated with PEITC and anti-Fas, changes in Bcl-2 family proteins were a slight induction of Bcl-xL in PTPL1 silenced cells and an increase in proapoptotic Mcl-1S and in the 24-kDa cleaved fragment of Mcl-1L in siRNA control-treated cells. It has been suggested that caspase-cleaved fragment(s) of Mcl-1 lose anti-apoptotic potential and become proapoptotic or alternatively, that Mcl-1 cleavage may disrupt the protective function of the protein.24 Taken together, these results suggest that a PTPL1-mediated signalling pathway could influence the expression levels of Bcl-xL and Mcl-1S proteins as well as final events in the apoptotic process such as activation of caspases and subsequently, caspase-mediated cleavage of proteins like Mcl-1 or PARP.
PKC family of serine/threonine kinases is activated by diverse stimuli and participates in many cellular processes. Most studies indicate that PKCd isoform is involved in suppression of cell proliferation and induction of apoptosis, but there are a few studies pointing to a role of PKCd in cell survival and anti-apoptotic responses.25 In relation to prostate cancer, some studies point towards a role of PKCd in migration and invasion,26, 27 while others have reported that expression of PKCd is required in anticancer drugs or death receptor-induced apoptosis.28, 29, 30 In this sense, we have observed that PKCd overexpression increases the apoptosis induction by PEITC and anti-Fas or paclitaxel in PC3 cells. It has been established that PKCd mediates paclitaxel, etoposide29 or phorbol ester-induced apoptosis in LNCaP cells;30 according to these data, PKCd silencing induces apoptosis resistance upon treatment with PEITC and anti-Fas or paclitaxel in LNCaP cells. We conclude that PKCd and PTPL1 seem to exert a proapoptotic function in both androgen-sensitive LNCaP cells and androgen-resistant PC3 cells, although the signalling events involved in the apoptotic process differ between both cell lines.
PKCd activity is regulated by binding of cofactors to the regulatory region and by phosphorylation on its kinase domain, especially on its activation loop, but the dependence of PKCd activity on its activation loop phosphorylation is still controversial.17 Interestingly, a study has shown that a mutant activation loop non-phosphorylated PKCd is catalytically active in cells, but its pattern of substrate phosphorylation and function is markedly changed. Notably, this mutant PKCd is as active as wild-type PKCd in induction of apoptosis.18 We have observed that in PC3 cells expressing endogenous PTPL1, PKCd phosphorylation at T505 (located within the activation loop) is clearly diminished upon treatment with PEITC and anti-Fas, whereas treated cells silenced for PTPL1 sustain the basal level of PKCd phosphorylation. It was confirmed as well that the loss of PKCd T505 phosphorylation in the presence of PTPL1 also occurs when PEITC or paclitaxel is used to induce apoptosis. It is interesting to note that the loss of PKCd T505 phosphorylation only occurs in cells undergoing apoptosis, so the question arises whether the loss of phosphorylation means a loss of activity of the kinase and resembles a loss of the protein, or if the presence of T505 dephosphorylated PKCd via PTPL1 is relevant for the induction of apoptosis. The latter question was confirmed, since the silencing of PKCd by siRNA induces apoptosis resistance in PC3 cells. Furthermore, the simultaneous silencing of PTPL1 and PKCd causes even a greater apoptosis resistance than any of them separately, supporting the notion that the presence of both proteins is necessary for a better efficiency of the apoptotic process. Thus, we have shown that PC3 cells are more sensitive to apoptosis induction by PEITC and anti-Fas in the presence of both PKCd and PTPL1, that PKCd is primarily unphosphorylated at T505 in cells undergoing apoptosis triggered by diverse stimuli and that the loss of T505 phosphorylation of PKCd may be mediated, probably indirectly, by PTPL1. As mentioned above, a mutant PKCd lacking activation loop phosphorylation has been reported to be as active as wild-type PKCd in the induction of apoptosis but displays a substrate-selective defect in phosphorylation when co-targeted with substrates in the cell and it is defective in activity in AP-1 and NF-kB reporter assays that require kinase activity.18 NF-kB mediates mainly anti-apoptotic signals in prostate cancer,31 so we investigated its activation status. Treatment of PC3 cells with PEITC and anti-Fas has hardly any effect on NF-kB phosphorylation when PKCd or both PTPL1 and PKCd are silenced. However, in treated cells expressing endogenous PTPL1 and PKCd, in which PKCd is primarily unphosphorylated at T505, active NF-kB (phosphorylated) is lower than in treated cells expressing endogenous PKCd but silenced for PTPL1, with PKCd phosphorylated at T505. According to these data, NF-kB dephosphorylation is achieved more efficiently when T505 dephosphorylated PKCd, via PTPL1, is present. Immunofluorescence studies also revealed a nuclear accumulation of NF-kB in PC3 cells silenced for PTPL1 or PKCd treated with PEITC and anti-Fas, supporting the notion of increased NF-kB activation under these conditions. Moreover, PTPL1 or PKCd overexpression leads to decreased NF-kB activation after PEITC and anti-Fas treatment in PC3 cells, corroborating again the influence of PTPL1 and PKCd in NF-kB signalling. Nonetheless, in the case of LNCaP cells, NF-kB phosphorylation diminishes in PEITC and anti-Fas-treated siRNA PTPL1 and siRNA PKCd cells, thus suggesting the involvement of alternative pathways in PTPL1 and PKCd-mediated signalling in LNCaP cells.
The phosphorylation status of IkBa, a negative regulator of NF-kB activity, was also examined. IkBa phosphorylation on serines 32 and 36 leads to its ubiquitination and degradation, which in turn promotes the translocation of NF-kB from the cytoplasm to the nucleus, where it becomes an active transcription factor.31 IkBa phosphorylation on tyrosine 42 also induces IkBa dissociation from NF-kB, but without proteolytic degradation20 and, interestingly, it has been shown that phosphorylated IkBa at Y42 is a substrate of PTPL1 in vitro.32 We have observed that, in PC3 cells treated with PEITC and anti-Fas expressing endogenous PTPL1 and PKCd, IkBa undergoes extensive dephosphorylation on S32, S36, and Y42. However, when PKCd, PTPL1 or both are silenced, dephosphorylation on the three sites upon drug treatment is impaired. It has been reported that PEITC inhibits IkBa phosphorylation and decreases the nuclear translocation of p65 subunit of NF-kB;13 thus, based on this previous work and on the above-mentioned results, we propose that inhibition of IkBa degradation and suppression of NF-kB activity (by both IkBa association and dephosphorylation) could be mediated, at least in part, by PTPL1 and PKCd, and that these signalling events contribute to apoptosis in PC3 prostate cancer cells.
Akt is a serine/threonine kinase that promotes cancer cell survival and mediates mainly anti-apoptotic signalling.33 PTPL1 has been shown to inhibit Akt phosphorylation,6 while others fail to find such a correlation.7 We have detected diminished Akt basal phosphorylation in PC3 cells silenced for PTPL1; however, Akt phosphorylation levels decrease after treatment either in the presence or in the absence of PTPL1 or PKCd. The ability of PEITC and anti-Fas treatment to downregulate phosphorylated Akt in all conditions tested could indicate that PTPL1 and PKCd are not required to dephosphorylate Akt.
PKCd immunohistochemical expression in prostate cancers is also controversial. A study of 23 prostate cancer specimens reported that PKCd was only expressed by stroma but not by epithelium.34 However, others have found a high expression of PKCd in the epithelial component of prostate cancers,26, 27 irrespective of the Gleason score.26 PTPL1 immunohistochemical expression has not yet been assessed in prostate cancers. We have found in a statistically significant way that immunohistochemical expression of both PTPL1 and PKCd in prostate cancer tissues is higher in well-differentiated, low Gleason score tumours than in poorly differentiated, high Gleason score tumours. In this sense, PTPL1 expression at the mRNA level has been found to be an independent favourable prognostic indicator for overall survival in patients with breast cancer.35 Loss of these proteins in prostate tumours of less favourable prognosis also indicates that their absence could be related to apoptosis resistance and tumour progression.

Materials and Methods
Cell culture and plasmid transfections
Human prostate cancer PC3 and LNCaP cell lines were obtained from the Interlab Cell Line Collection (Genoa, Italy). All the experiments were done using vials from the first 10 passages after receipt. Cells were routinely grown in RPMI-1640 supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum, 100 U/ml penicillin, 100 mg/ml streptomycin, 10 mM HEPES buffer and 1 mM glutamine in a 37degC, humidified incubator under 5% CO2. Cells were harvested by trypsinization. Transient transfections with pCMV6-XL4-PTPL1 or pCMV6-XL5-PKCd plasmids (Origene, Rockville, MD, USA), were carried out using the FuGENE reagent (Promega, Madison, WI, USA), according to manufacturer's instructions. Cells were subjected to different treatments 24 or 48 h after transfection.
Small interfering RNA
siRNA transfections were carried out using the Dharmafect reagent (Thermo Fisher Dharmacon, Lafayette, CO, USA) according to manufacturer's instructions. The PTPL1-specific siRNA and the control-negative siRNA were from Qiagen (Hilden, Germany). PKCd-specific siRNA was from Thermo Fisher Dharmacon. All siRNAs were used at 100 nM. Cells were subjected to different treatments 24 or 48 h after silencing.
Antibodies
Rabbit polyclonal anti-Bax and anti-Bak were available from BD Biosciences (San Jose, CA, USA). Mouse monoclonal anti-Bcl-xL, rabbit polyclonal anti-Mcl-1, rabbit polyclonal anti-PTPL1, rabbit polyclonal anti-IkBa, and rabbit polyclonal anti-NF-kBp65 antibodies were from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Santa Cruz, CA, USA); mouse monoclonal anti-b-actin from Sigma (St Louis, MO, USA). Rabbit polyclonal anti-phospho-PKCd (Thr505), anti-phospho-Akt (Ser473), and anti-PKCd antibodies were from Cell Signaling (Danvers, MA, USA). A second rabbit polyclonal anti-PKCd used in immunohistochemical procedures was from Abcam (Cambridge, UK). Rabbit polyclonal anti-cleaved caspase 3, anti-phospho-IkBa (S32/36), anti-phospho-IkBa (Y42), and anti-phospho-NF-kBp65 (S276) antibodies were from Abcam. Rabbit polyclonal anti-cleaved caspase 7 (Asp198) and anti-cleaved caspase 9 (Asp315) antibodies were from Calbiochem (San Diego, CA, USA). Dilutions used in western blots were anti-Bax (1 : 1000); anti-Bak (1 : 2000); anti-Bcl-xL (1 : 200); anti-b-actin (1 : 20 000); anti-PTPL1 (1 : 500); anti-phospho-PKCd (Thr505) (1 : 150); anti-PKCd (1 : 200); anti-phospho-Akt (Ser473) (1 : 400); anti-phospho-IkBa (S32/36) (1 : 300); anti-phospho-IkBa (Y42) (1 : 200); anti-phospho-NF-kBp65 (S276) (1 : 500); anti-IkBa (1 : 500); anti-NF-kBp65 (1 : 500); anti-cleaved caspase 3 (1 : 200); anti-cleaved caspase 7 (1 : 1000); and anti-cleaved caspase 9 (1 : 500). Caspase-mediated cleavage of PARP was assessed by western blot using a mouse monoclonal anti-human PARP (BD Biosciences) at 1 : 250 dilution.
Western blotting
Cells were lysed in Nonidet P-40 (NP-40) lysis buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol and 1% NP-40). Equal amounts of total protein, as determined by using BCA protein assay (Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA), were separated by SDS-PAGE on 4-20% gradient polyacrylamide gels (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). Gels were electroblotted onto nitrocellulose membranes (GE Healthcare, Little Chalfont, UK). Membranes were stained with Ponceau S to ensure that protein amounts were comparable. For immunodetection, blots were blocked in 1% blocking reagent (Roche, Mannheim, Germany) in 0.05% Tween 20-PBS for 1 h and incubated with primary antibody overnight at 4degC diluted in blocking buffer. Blots were then washed in 0.05% Tween 20-PBS and incubated with either goat anti-mouse (1 : 10 000; GE Healthcare) or goat anti-rabbit (1 : 20 000; GE Healthcare) peroxidase-labelled antibodies in blocking buffer for 1 h. Enhanced chemoluminescent system was applied according to manufacturer's protocol (GE Healthcare). Scanning densitometry was performed with QuantiScan software (Biosoft, Cambridge, UK). Arbitrary densitometric units of the proteins of interest were corrected for those of b-actin. Data comparing differences between two conditions were statistically analysed, when indicated, using paired Student's t-test. Differences were considered as significant when P<0.05.
Tumour immunohistochemistry
Prostate cancer tissue microarray comprised 76 formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded primary prostate tumour cases selected from diagnostic radical prostatectomy specimens collected at our Hospital, with institutional ethical board approval. Two independent pathologists evaluated Gleason score according to conventional criteria.36 Immunohistochemistry was performed as previously described.37 For PTPL1 antibody, antigen retrieval was performed with a microwave, using 1 mM EDTA pH 9.0 and, for PKCd, with 1 mg/ml trypsin, 15 min at 37degC. Immunostaining was evaluated independently by two observers and scored positive if >25% of carcinoma cells were intensely stained. Association between PTPL1 or PKCd immunohistochemical expression and Gleason grade was analysed by Fisher's exact test. Differences were considered as significant when P<0.05.
Apoptosis induction and assays
Stock solutions of PEITC (Sigma) and paclitaxel (Calbiochem) were prepared at 10 mM in DMSO (dimethyl sulfoxide, Sigma) and stored frozen. Monoclonal anti-Fas antibody clone CH11 was from Beckman Coulter (Fullerton, CA, USA). Annexin V binding assays were carried out as previously reported37 using a FACScan flow cytometer (BD Biosciences). In all the experiments, DMSO was added to untreated cells.
Reverse-transcription and quantitative PCR
Total RNA was extracted using the Purescript RNA Isolation Kit (Gentra, Minneapolis, MN, USA) according to manufacturer's protocol. In all, 0.5 mg of total RNA was subjected to DNase I (Invitrogen) digestion and subsequently processed to cDNA by reverse transcription with Transcriptor First Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit (Roche) according to manufacturer's protocol. PCRs were performed in a 25-ml reaction volume on the SmartCycler II Real-Time PCR Detection System (Cepheid, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) using the QuantiMix Easy SyG kit (Biotools, Madrid, Spain) and 500 nM of each specific primer. The levels of PTPL1 and the housekeeping gene RPL13A in each sample were quantified by measuring the Ct values in duplicate. These mean Ct values were transformed to quantities using the delta-Ct method. The sample with the lowest value was assigned the value 1. The quantity of PTPL1 transcript was divided by the quantity of RPL13A to obtain a normalized value.
