[Abstract, Methods, Results, Discussion, Mixed]

Potential Residential Exposure to Toxics Release Inventory Chemicals during
Pregnancy and Childhood Brain Cancer. Background Although the susceptibility of the developing fetus to various chemical exposures is well documented, the role of environmental chemicals in childhood brain cancer etiology is not well understood.   Objectives We aimed to evaluate whether mothers of childhood brain cancer cases had greater potential residential exposure to Toxics Release Inventory (TRI) chemicals than control mothers during pregnancy.   Methods We included 382 brain cancer cases diagnosed at < 10 years of age from 1993 through 1997 who were identified from four statewide cancer registries. One-to-one matched controls were selected by random-digit dialing. Computer-assisted telephone interviews were conducted. Using residential history of mothers during pregnancy, we measured proximity to TRI facilities and exposure index, including mass and chemicals released. We calculated odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) using conditional logistic regression to estimate brain cancer risk associated with TRI chemicals.   Results Increased risk was observed for mothers living within 1 mi of a TRI facility (OR = 1.66; 95% CI, 1.11-2.48) and living within 1 mi of a facility releasing carcinogens (OR = 1.72; 95% CI, 1.05-2.82) for having children diagnosed with brain cancer before 5 years of age, compared to living > 1 mi from a facility. Taking into account the mass and toxicity of chemical releases, we found a nonsignificant increase in risk (OR = 1.25; 95% CI, 0.67-2.34) comparing those with the lowest versus highest exposure index.   Conclusions Risk of childhood brain cancers may be associated with living near a TRI facility; however, this is an exploratory study and further studies are needed.

Materials and Methods
Study population
Subjects who participated in the U.S. Atlantic Coast childhood brain cancer
study, a population-based case-control study of environmental
risk factors (Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry 2004), were eligible for the TRI study. Briefly, cases eligible for the original
Atlantic coast childhood brain cancer study included all incident
cases of first primary brain cancer [International Classification of Diseases for Oncology (ICD-O-2) (World Health Organization 1990) codes C71.0-C71.9 including all morphologic codes with a behavior
code of 3, excluding lymphomas] (Percy et al. 1990) diagnosed at < 10 years of age between 1993 and 1997, born in the
United States, and a resident of one of the four states (Florida, New
Jersey, New York excluding New York City, and Pennsylvania) at the time
of diagnosis. In addition, an eligible case had to have the biological
mother available for an interview in English and a telephone in the
household. During the computer-assisted telephone interview, a standardized
screening questionnaire was used to verify eligibility and obtain
mothers' consent to participate in the study. The study protocol
was approved by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and
four state institutional review boards. The four statewide cancer registries
initially identified 937 case children. Eligibility screening
interviews were not completed for 228: three (0.3%) physician
refusals, two (0.2%) out-of-state children, 176 (18.8%) unable
to be traced, 39 (4.2%) mother refusals, and eight (0.9%) with
language barriers. Of the 709 case children for whom
screening interviews were completed, 662 met the eligibility criteria, and 535 mothers
of the 662 agreed to participate. Of the 535, nine
were excluded because of difficulties in finding matched controls, and 526 were
included in the original study (56.1% of the originally
identified 937 cases or 79.5% of the 662 eligible case children).
Potential controls in the original study were identified from the study
base population through random-digit dialing (RDD) (Wacholder et al. 1992; Waksberg 1978). Eligible controls had to be born in the United States, be free of cancer, have
the biological mother available for an interview in English, and
have a telephone in the household. An equal number of controls were
selected by matching individually to cases on sex, race (white, black, or
other), birth year (+- 1 year), and state of residence
at the time of cases' diagnosis. The age at diagnosis of each
case was used as a reference age for the corresponding control. Among
the 20,802 RDD numbers prescreened for nonworking and nonvoice numbers, each
of 3,553 (17.1%) households had a child meeting the eligibility
criteria for the control selection. Of the 3,553 children, 820 (23.1%) met
the matching criteria. Of the 820 meeting the matching
criteria, 122 did not have a matching case available, 102 mothers
refused to participate, and 526 agreed to participate (2.5% of
the 20,802 working residential numbers or 83.8% of the 628 eligible
control children for whom a matching case child was available).
This TRI study included 764 subjects (382 case-control pairs) of
the 1,052 (526 case-control pairs) participants in the original
study: 222 subjects born before 1988 were excluded because the reporting
of TRI information began in 1987; 34 subjects who had incomplete
pregnancy residential information or dates of residence were excluded; 32 subjects
missing their matched case or control counterparts were
excluded.
Computer-assisted telephone interview
The biological mothers of cases and controls were interviewed in English
using a computer-assisted telephone interview system. Bilingual (Spanish) interviewers
were available. Mothers were asked to provide information
on residential history of the parents and child from 24 months
before the child's birth until the age of diagnosis or reference
age (i.e., age at diagnosis for counterpart case) for controls. Interviewers
were instructed to obtain residential addresses and to take
nearest intersecting street names when the street numbers were unavailable. The
questionnaire also included information on demographic characteristics
and on mothers' smoking habits during pregnancy.
Exposure assessment
Addresses of mothers during pregnancy for the 10 months before birth were
geocoded with latitude and longitude coordinates using GeoCoder (version 3.4b; GeoAccess
Inc., Lenexa, KS). This software package was used
with the TRI facilities' geographic coordinates to determine
exact distances from each residence to all facilities within a 2-mi radius. We
geocoded 624 of 928 (67.2%) pregnancy addresses in the
first round. We located 288 of 928 (31%) unable to be geocoded
in the first round because of invalid addresses or zip codes using
database records, public records, court records, and calls to post offices; these
were gecoded in the second or third round. A total of 912 of 928 (98.3%) pregnancy addresses were successfully geocoded.
We extracted the TRI data from the U.S. EPA TRI CD-ROM containing information
for the years 1987-1997 (U.S. EPA 2000). To assess the quality of geocoded data obtained from the TRI database, we
randomly selected approximately 5% of the TRI facilities' addresses
used in this study and matched those to addresses
on the Streetmap 2000 street layer residing on the spatial data engine
using ArcGIS (version 8.1; Environmental Systems Research Institute, Inc., Redlands, WA). Distance measurements for both were calculated. The
range of difference was between 0.017 and 0.534 mi, with a mean value
of 0.3455 mi (0.060, 0.119, 0.343 mi for 25th, 50th, and 75th percentiles
respectively). The original plan to use the 0.5-mi radius or cutoff
point as a potential exposure category was abandoned because these
distances were deemed unstable. We retained the 1.0-mi and 2.0-mi radii
as proximity measures.
We calculated the distance from the mother's residence during any
point in pregnancy to the nearest TRI facility and categorized the
exposure levels as residing <= 1 mi versus > 1 mi, and <= 2 mi
versus residing > 2 mi of any facility. Next, we investigated
whether any carcinogen was released to the air from facilities within 1 mi
versus > 1 mi and within 2 mi versus > 2 mi of any facility. The
TRI air emissions of any class of carcinogens were categorized
as dichotomous variables without regard to the amount released to
the air. Air emissions included stack and fugitive air releases. Carcinogens
as defined by the U.S. EPA included all known, probable, and possible
human carcinogens (U.S. EPA 2002a); EPCRA section 313 lists toxic chemicals that meet the Occupational Safety
and Health Administration carcinogen standard and are associated
with the 0.1% de minimis concentration limit when in a mixture (U.S. EPA 2002a).
Finally, we chose a hazard-screening tool for exposure assessment. To comparatively
rank TRI chemical releases, we adapted the chronic toxicity
index developed by the U.S. EPA's Region III (Neumann et al. 1998). The screening tool uses the TRI databases combining toxicity factors
and total mass to estimate the relative hazards of TRI chemical releases
with a separate algorithm for carcinogens and noncarcinogens. For
carcinogens, the carcinogenic weight of evidence (WOE) and cancer potency
factors (CPF) and the pounds of chemicals released are included in
the index calculation. The WOE data were obtained from the Integrated
Risk Information System (U.S. EPA 2002b), a database of human health effects that may result from exposure to
environmental substances. We used the U.S. EPA Region II Risk-Based-Concentration
Table (U.S. EPA 2002a) to obtain the CPF for the inhalation or ingestion routes of exposure. Although
the likely exposure route would be through the inhalation route, chemicals
with only oral CPF were included in the index using the
oral CPF value.
We modified the chronic toxicity index to include the duration of residence
and the distance to the TRI facility. With some subjects' pregnancy
period spanning 2 calendar years, duration of residence at
each address during pregnancy for each calendar year was calculated separately
to match it with the appropriate year-specific TRI data. Because
the TRI data report the total amount of emissions during a calendar
year, the number of months a woman lived at a particular address for
the particular year while pregnant was divided by 12 months and then
multiplied into the chronic toxicity index. Only known, probable, and
possible carcinogens, as defined by the U.S. EPA (2002a), that were released within 2 mi of pregnancy residence and having the
appropriate carcinogenic WOE and CPF information available were included. We
incorporated the duration of exposure, and residential distance
to the facilities to the chronic toxicity index:
Statistical analysis
We used conditional logistic regression analyses to achieve maximum likelihood
estimates of ORs and 95% confidence intervals (CI) for
the exposure variables. Exposure variables for residential proximity
and residing near a facility releasing carcinogens were categorized as <= 1 mi
versus > 1 mi, and <= 2 mi versus > 2 mi. We
categorized the exposure index into three levels using the following
cut-point values: zero; greater than zero but less than median index
value among controls; and greater than median index value among controls. The
potential confounders examined included mother's education, household
income level, and mother's pregnancy age. Because
there were no substantial confounding effects from these variables, judged
by the change-inestimate methods (i.e., 10% change
in OR), unadjusted ORs are presented. Because it is possible that the
effect of potential gestational exposure may be more relevant to cancer
development in earlier childhood or to particular histological subtype
of childhood brain cancer, we repeated the analysis by reference age (< 5 and >= 5 years) and by two major histological subtypes, primitive
neuroectodermal tumors (PNET) and astrocytomas [ICD-O-2 codes 9400-9441 and 9470-9473, respectively (Percy et al. 1990)]. All statistical analyses were conducted using SAS software (version 8.02; SAS
Institute Inc., Cary, NC).

Results
Demographics and histopathologic characteristics of the study population
Table 1 shows the distribution of the histopathologic types of the brain tumor
among cases and controls. Most of the case and control children were
white (88%); 11% were black and only 1.6% were
classified as other. There were 233 pairs (61%) with a reference
age (age at diagnosis for cases) of < 5 years. Most of the children (72%) were
born before 1993. The distribution of mothers' age
at pregnancy was similar in cases and controls (Table 1). Case mothers' education levels were slightly higher than control
mothers' education levels, but the household income levels
were slightly higher for the controls. Astrocytomas were the most common
type; about half the cases had astrocytomas whereas 29% had
PNETs (Table 2).
Overall, 635 case and control mothers lived at one address for the entire
pregnancy. The remaining 129 (17%) mothers had lived at more
than one address during pregnancy: 121 mothers with two and eight with
three addresses. The resulting total was 901 addresses. Mothers' residences
during pregnancy were located in 23 different states
for the case mothers and 18 different states for control mothers. However, 94% of
both case and control mothers lived during the entire
pregnancy in one of the four states--Florida, New Jersey, New
York (excluding New York City), or Pennsylvania.
Residential proximity to TRI facilities during pregnancy
We identified a total of 1,624 different TRI facilities within 2 mi of
any of the case and control residences. The case mothers had a higher
frequency of living within 1 and 2 mi of any TRI facility than control
mothers at any point during pregnancy. Table 3 shows the results of analyses comparing cases and controls living within 1 mi
versus > 1 mi from TRI facilities and living within 2 mi versus > 2 mi. Living
within 1 mi of any TRI facilities during pregnancy
showed slightly increased OR for all reference ages (OR 1.32; 95% CI, 0.96-1.80) and a statistically significant OR for
those < 5 years of age at diagnosis (OR 1.66; 95% CI, 1.11-2.48) compared
to living > 1 mi. For living within 1 mi versus > 1 mi
from a TRI facility releasing carcinogens, the OR was 1.48 (95% CI, 1.01-2.17) for all ages, and 1.72 (95% CI, 1.05-2.82) for those < 5 years of age at diagnosis. Analysis
by tumor types, astrocytoma and PNET, was associated with increased
risk estimates, but the results were not statistically significant (Table 4). For astroycytoma, living within 1 mi of any TRI facility had an OR of 1.18 (95% CI, 0.77-1.82) compared to living > 1 mi
from any facility, and living within 1 mi of a facility releasing carcinogens
had an OR of 1.32 (95% CI, 0.79-2.22) compared
to living > 1 mi from a facility releasing carcinogens.
Exposure index
Of 193 TRI compounds classified as known, probable, or possible carcinogens, 55 compounds
were actually released within 2 mi of residences of
the study population during pregnancy. From those 55 compounds, we obtained
information on 26 compounds and calculated the exposure indices
for them. The most common compounds released within 2 mi of residence
for individuals in the study population were dichloromethane, nickel
and nickel compounds, styrene, lead, trichloroethylene (TCE), formaldehyde, and
di(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate. Compounds with the highest exposure
index values for residential addresses were 1,3-butadiene, ethylene
oxide, dichloromethane, chloroform, and vinyl chloride.
There was an increasing risk trend as the exposure index level increased
for those with a reference age of < 5 years: Compared to subjects
with an exposure index of zero, the ORs were 1.24 (95% CI, 0.67-2.28) for
subjects with an exposure index of greater than zero
and less than the median and 1.25 (95% CI, 0.67-2.34) for
subjects with an exposure index of greater than the median (Table 5). However, the increasing trend was not statistically significant (p = 0.38). No increasing trend in risks for two major subtypes of
brain cancer, astrocytoma and PNETs, was observed by the increasing
exposure index level (Table 6).
Because some of the carcinogens did not have the appropriate toxicity information, a
separate analysis was conducted by calculating the exposure
index only with the mass of compounds released, duration at each residence, and
distance to the facility. However, the results did not differ
and elevated risk was not observed.

Discussion
Environmental epidemiology studies constantly struggle with ways to assess
past exposure. Although a number of databases include information
on the release of chemicals, these were collected mostly for regulatory
purposes and therefore lack the individual specificity desired for these
studies. Nonetheless, it is important to try to use these data in
creative ways if we are to have any information at all on past exposures. Because
of the uncertainty built into using these data, studies such
as this must be interpreted with caution. In this study we used data
from the TRI to assess exposure in three different ways: living within
a specified distance of a TRI facility (1 or 2 mi), living within
a specified distance of a TRI facility emitting a carcinogen (1 or 2 mi), and
a toxicity index that took into consideration the toxicity of
the chemical released and the duration of the exposure in addition to
distance from a TRI facility. Actual individual exposure measures for
specific chemicals were not available for this study.
We observed an elevated risk for mothers living within 1 mi of a TRI facility
and living within 1 mi of a facility releasing carcinogens for
having children with brain cancer diagnosed before 10 years of age. The
odds ratios were higher for brain cancer cases diagnosed before age 5 years. For
the exposure assessment using the exposure index, we observed
an increasing risk trend as the exposure index level increased, although
the trend was not statistically significant. Nevertheless, since
the number of subjects that actually had a positive exposure index
value was small, p-values would have been affected by the small sample size.
It is not feasible to compare the results of this current analysis with
previous studies because similar studies linking childhood brain cancers
with TRI releases are not available. However, similar methods of exposure
assessment were used in previous studies on central nervous system
birth defects from possible exposure to TRI sites (Croen et al. 1997; Marshall et al. 1997). Marshall et al. (1997) observed an increased risk for CNS defects associated with living within 1 mi
of a facility emitting either solvents or metals into the air; however, they
did not observe a dose-response trend as distance
to TRI facilities was reduced. It is interesting that the 1-mi cutoff
for exposure categorization resulted in significant risk for CNS defects (Marshall et al. 1997), but there was a lack of association when distance was further subcategorized
within 1 mi.
Although prenatal residential proximity to TRI facilities resulted in a
statistically significant increased risk for childhood brain cancer, it
is imprudent to associate that with actual exposure to any compounds
released, so results should be interpreted accordingly. Several issues
concerning exposure assessment must be taken into account. Some of
the limitations of this analysis include concern over accuracy of residential
history data, limitations of the TRI data themselves, and methods
of exposure assessment.
Residential history information used in this analysis comprised self-reported
responses from mothers of cases and controls. There is potential
for recall and reporting bias that is further compounded by the fact
that some subjects had to provide information dating back 10 years. Inaccurate
address information for cases and controls that made it impossible
to assign geocoding information meant that distances to TRI facilities
could not be determined, so that some cases and controls had to
be excluded from the study. The concern here is selection bias, because
subjects who were living in rural areas, less educated, or frequent
movers may have been more likely to be excluded (Ward et al. 2000). However, only 11 of the 830 children born after 1988 were missing information
on distance to TRI facilities, and 23 of the 830 children were
missing mothers' pregnancy residential information, for a total
of only 34 of the 830 (4%), which is likely too small of
a number to introduce such a bias.
Another limitation of this study lies with the TRI data themsleves: They
are self-reports from companies and it is difficult to assess the accuracy
of the data. Facilities with < 10 full-time employees or those
not meeting TRI quantity thresholds are not required to report releases. Thus
exposure experienced by both cases and controls may be higher
than estimated through the TRI, because such facilities also may contribute
to the overall pollutant burden in the community. The variability
in exposure arising from these unreported emissions relative to those
arising from TRI facilities is unknown. Also, chemical releases and
waste generation are estimated and do not provide measurement of actual
concentrations in the environment (Neumann et al. 1998).
For the first two levels of analysis using proximity and the release of
carcinogens, residing near multiple facilities or multiple compounds
released was not accounted for, although an attempt was made to include
them in the exposure index. The exposure index has its own limitations
because not all the TRI compounds have a toxicity value necessary for
obtaining the chronic index. Several compounds lacked the inhalation
data requiring oral toxicity factors to be used to estimate the index. However, preliminary
findings suggest that substituting oral factors
for inhalation did not change the final rank of TRI emission using the
chronic index approach (Neumann et al. 1998).
This study did not account for other potential confounders such as mother's
exposure to chemicals at the workplace during pregnancy. The
TRI is just one source of information on environmental releases. Other
sources of air pollution such as toxic emissions from cars or other
hazardous waste sites were not included. Only TRI air emissions data
were extracted for the analysis, so we did not explore possible exposure
through contaminated drinking water. The pathway of exposure through
contaminated drinking water is more difficult to assess for each individual; the
location of TRI sites may or may not have resulted in water
contamination because municipal water wells are not directly related
to location of residences (Marshall et al. 1993). We would need to know whether private wells or municipal water wells
were the principal source of water and determine if they were possibly
contaminated by TRI chemical releases.
Although we used only the period of 10 months before birth, many mothers
and their children lived in the same residential address long after
birth but these exposure data were not included in the analysis. Therefore, it
is difficult to rule out effects of potential exposure after
birth. Further studies may be conducted to determine whether children
who had lived at the same address from pregnancy to early childhood may
have been exposed to further environmental chemical releases and possibly
had a higher risk than those exposed only prenatally. Furthermore, because
the TRI facilities report the annual releases and transfer
without indicating the specific time and date of the release, it is possible
that the actual releases occurred outside of the 10-month pregnancy
period we examined.
There are several strengths in this study. This is the only study to date
to examine the role of TRI releases and childhood brain cancer. In
addition, this study included a large number of cases and controls drawn
from the general population. We attempted to improve and build on previous
exposure assessment methods. Most previous studies such as those
dealing with environmental equity have compared populations using census
tracts and circular zones of different distances around hazardous
waste sites and compared population characteristics within and outside
of those boundaries (Sheppard et al. 1999). Some have used ZIP-code boundaries (White and Aldrich 1999); however, ZIP codes have irregular boundaries, which do not indicate
any specific relation to the hazardous waste site. We used direct distance
to the TRI facilities and attempted to incorporate the amount as
well as the toxicity of compounds released through the use of the chronic
toxicity index.
Most published studies relied on the address on the birth certificate, which
may not give a true picture of residence throughout the entire pregnancy. In
this study we used residential addresses during pregnancy
that were obtained from a survey question on residential history, rather
than using the address at time of birth, and included multiple addresses
when applicable.
Our results suggest a possible relationship between living within 1 mi
of any TRI facility or a TRI facility emitting carcinogens during pregnancy
and a child's later developing childhood brain cancer. However, there
are many uncertainties as to why such a relationship exists
and why the same relationship was not found for living within half
a mi of a facility. Most of the limitations discussed would be expected
to bias the risk estimates toward the null and obscure any true association; however, it
is unclear how other limitations might affect the
risk estimate.
Despite the inherent limitations in using these data for epidemiology studies, research
in this area needs to continue to refine their use. Further
studies need to be conducted to explore whether these results can
be replicated and also address and improve on some of the limitations
described. Although this was a large study of childhood brain cancer
including > 300 cases and 300 controls, this study was not designed
to focus on specific chemicals because the number of cases and controls
with potential to exposure specific carcinogens would be too small
to warrant meaningful analysis. Therefore, it is not possible to pinpoint
the specific agents that may have increased the risk for brain cancer. There
is the potential for further improving on exposure assessment
methods by using an exposure index using a larger sample size or
by obtaining more complete toxicity and exposure information for the compounds.

Correction
In Table 2, the value for "All other" has been corrected from 17 (4.5), as
published online, to 75 (19.6); in Table 5, the value for "All reference ages" exposure index level
II has been changed from 1.91 to 0.91.
