[Abstract, Introduction, Methods, Results, Discussion]

O6-Methylguanine-DNA Methyltransferase (MGMT) mRNA
                    Expression Predicts Outcome in Malignant Glioma Independent of
                        MGMT Promoter Methylation. Background We analyzed prospectively whether MGMT (O6-methylguanine-DNA                         methyltransferase) mRNA expression gains prognostic/predictive impact                         independent of MGMT promoter methylation in malignant                         glioma patients undergoing radiotherapy with concomitant and adjuvant                         temozolomide or temozolomide alone. As DNA-methyltransferases (DNMTs) are                         the enzymes responsible for setting up and maintaining DNA methylation                         patterns in eukaryotic cells, we analyzed further, whether                             MGMT promoter methylation is associated with                         upregulation of DNMT expression.   Methodology/Principal Findings Adult patients with a histologically proven malignant astrocytoma                         (glioblastoma: N = 53, anaplastic astrocytoma:                         N = 10) were included. MGMT promoter                         methylation was determined by methylation-specific PCR (MSP) and sequencing                         analysis. Expression of MGMT and DNMTs mRNA were analysed by real-time qPCR.                         Prognostic factors were obtained from proportional hazards models.                         Correlation between MGMT mRNA expression and MGMT                         methylation status was validated using data from the Cancer Genome Atlas                         (TCGA) database (N = 229 glioblastomas). Low MGMT mRNA                         expression was strongly predictive for prolonged time to progression,                         treatment response, and length of survival in univariate and multivariate                         models (p<0.0001); the degree of MGMT mRNA expression was highly                         correlated with the MGMT promoter methylation status                         (p<0.0001); however, discordant findings were seen in 12 glioblastoma                         patients: Patients with methylated tumors with high MGMT mRNA expression                         (N = 6) did significantly worse than those with low                         transcriptional activity (p<0.01). Conversely, unmethylated tumors with                         low MGMT mRNA expression (N = 6) did better than their                         counterparts. A nearly identical frequency of concordant and discordant                         findings was obtained by analyzing the TCGA database (p<0.0001).                         Expression of DNMT1 and DNMT3b was strongly upregulated in tumor tissue, but                         not correlated with MGMT promoter methylation and MGMT mRNA                         expression.   Conclusions/Significance MGMT mRNA expression plays a direct role for mediating tumor sensitivity to                         alkylating agents. Discordant findings indicate methylation-independent                         pathways of MGMT expression regulation. DNMT1 and DNMT3b are likely to be                         involved in CGI methylation. However, their exact role yet has to be                         defined.

Introduction
World Health Organisation (WHO) Grade III anaplastic astrocytoma (AA) and WHO grade
                IV glioblastoma (GBM) are rapidly progressive and resistant to therapy. Thus,
                malignant glioma patients suffer the devastating effects of an incurable disease
                with short survival times after diagnosis. More recently, some progress has been
                achieved in the treatment of these tumors: Prospective randomized studies of the
                European Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC) and the National
                Cancer Institute of Canada (NCIC) trial have shown that the addition of the
                alkylating agent temozolomide (TMZ) to radiotherapy (XRT) for newly diagnosed GBM
                resulted in significant prolongation of both time to progression and overall
                survival. As a result, median survival which has been estimated in the range one
                year for GBM and three years for AA [1], [2], [3] has slightly been increased. Moreover, molecular markers
                have been identified, which determine the course of the disease. An important
                biomarker is the methylation status of the O6-methylguanine-DNA
                methyltransferase (MGMT) gene promoter. Epigenetic silencing of the
                    MGMT gene has been identified as a strong and independent
                predictive factor of treatment response for both GBM- and AA-patients undergoing
                chemotherapy with alkylating agents [4], [5]. Correlations between promoter methylation and favorable
                treatment response after chemotherapy with TMZ or other alkylating agents are
                explained by the assumption that DNA methylation of a cysteine-phosphate-guanine
                (CpG) island (CGI) within the MGMT promoter directly leads to a
                repression of MGMT transcriptional activity and MGMT protein
                expression [6];
                determination of the promoter methylation status may thus serve as a
                "chemosensitivity sensor" in glioma patients. This hypothesis, however,
                which implies that MGMT promoter methylation status, MGMT expression data and
                outcome measurements are strongly correlated with each other, has not unequivocally
                been supported: Studies evaluating MGMT expression by immunohistochemistry (IHC),
                for example, mostly failed to detect correlations between MGMT expression,
                    MGMT methylation status and outcome measurements [7]-[9]. One more recently published study on transcriptional
                activity in glioblastomas questions mechanisms of "direct"
                transcriptional repression by MGMT promoter methylation for a
                considerable number of tumors: Even though overall a strong correlation between
                    MGMT promoter methylation and the degree of MGMT mRNA
                expression was found [10], discordant findings were seen in at least 15% of
                the investigated tumors, i.e. unmethylated (methylated) tumors expressed low (high)
                levels of MGMT mRNA. Unfortunately, this study did not provide any correlative data
                between MGMT mRNA expression and clinical outcome to further support the view of a
                sometimes "broken link" between MGMT promoter
                methylation and mRNA expression.
The objective of the present study was to prospectively investigate the predictive
                impact of MGMT gene expression under consideration of its
                correlation with the MGMT promoter methylation status in malignant
                glioma patients undergoing XRT and/or TMZ treatment. As aberrant DNA
                (cytosine-5)-methyltransferase (DNMT) expression has been observed in several tumor
                tissues [11]-[13] which might - at least in part - explain
                epigenetic silencing of selected genes by promoter methylation, we additionally
                estimated the expression of DNMTs in tumor tissue as compared to normal brain, its
                prognostic/predictive relevance in malignant glioma, and its correlation with both
                the MGMT promoter methylation status and MGMT mRNA expression
                levels.

Methods
Study design
Adult patients were eligible if they had i) a supratentorial GBM or AA with
                    histology being proven by stereotactic biopsy or open tumor resection (May 2007
                    to March 2009), no prior history of surgery, XRT, and/or chemotherapy, and a
                    Karnofsky performance score (KPS) >=60 [14]. All patients gave
                    written informed consent, and the prospective study protocol was reviewed and
                    approved by the institutional review board of the Ludwig Maximilians University,
                    Munich, Germany (AZ 216/14). Indication for either surgical procedure was
                    dependent on tumor size and location, mass effects of the tumor, patients'
                    KPS and/or significant co-morbidity. In case of moderate space occupying effects
                    of the tumor, a highly eloquent tumor location, and/or significant co-morbidity
                    stereotactic biopsy was preferred. Histopathological diagnosis, determination of
                    the MGMT promoter methylation status and MGMT
                    transcriptional activity were obtained within 8-12 working days after
                    surgery. Within 3 weeks upon histopathological diagnosis, patients with GBM were
                    assigned to receive XRT plus concomitant and adjuvant TMZ (XRT/TMZ-TMZ).
                    Treatment parameters were as follows: XRT (60 Gy in 30 fractions)/TMZ (daily
                    dose of 75 mg/m2)-TMZ (150 to 200 mg/m2 per day for 5
                    days of every 28-day cycle). In case of long term compliance, TMZ was continued
                    (at the same dose) until tumor progression occurred, which indicated a
                    difference to the EORTC treatment protocol [2]. Patients with the diagnosis
                    of an AA were treated according the EORTC protocol [2] in case of an
                    extraaordinarily high Ki67 labelling index (>20%), otherwise primary
                    chemotherapy with TMZ was initiated and XRT was withheld [5]. At baseline evaluation,
                    within 72 h after cytoreductive surgery, 4-6 weeks after XRT/TMZ and every
                    3 cycles during TMZ maintenance therapy, neuroradiologic examinations were
                    performed. Early treatment response was evaluated after the completion of 3 TMZ
                    cycles or earlier in case of clinical deterioration. Magnetic resonance image
                    (MRI) interpretation was independently done according to the Macdonald criteria
                        [15] by
                    an experienced neuroradiologist (JL), who was blinded for the
                        MGMT methylation status and transcriptional activity as
                    well as for the follow up data of the patients. Tumor progression had to be
                    confirmed by further clinical and neuroradiological follow up to exclude any
                    bias by pseudoprogression [16]. Haematology was performed weekly. Adverse events
                    were defined according to the National Cancer Institute (NCI) Common Toxicity
                    Criteria, version 3.0. The minimum follow up after inclusion of the last patient
                    had to be 6 months.
Histopathology
For histopathological evaluation, tissue samples harvested from either
                    cytoreductive surgery or biopsy procedures were fixed with 4% buffered
                    formalin, paraffin embedded and subjected to routine stainings (Hematoxylin and
                    Eosin, Elastica van Gieson, Periodic acid-Schiff) and IHC with antibodies
                    against human GFAP (monoclonal mouse, clone 6F2, Dako, Glostrup, Denmark) and
                    anti-MAP2 (clone HM-2, Sigma, Saint Louis, Missouri, USA). Proliferation
                    activity was determined using anti-human Ki67 antigen (mouse monoclonal, clone
                    MIB-1, Dako, Glostrup, Denmark). The histological diagnosis of all tissue
                    specimens was made according to WHO criteria [17].
Tissue sampling
Glioma tissue samples for molecular genetic analysis were obtained from
                    fluorescence-guided open tumor resections [18] or serial stereotactic
                    biopsy procedures [19], [20]. Molecular genetic
                    evaluation of tissue samples obtained from open tumor resection was exclusively
                    done in tissue samples in the direct vicinity of samples showing solid tumor
                    tissue. In case of biopsy, co-registration of computerized tomography (CT), and
                    MRI (including T1- and T2-weighted sequences) served for 3D visualization
                    (i-plan stereotaxy(r), BrainLAB(r), Feldkirchen, Germany) of the tumor and
                    the simulation of the best biopsy trajectory representative of the solid tumor.
                    Serial biopsies were taken in one-millimeter steps exactly along the chosen
                    trajectory. Using micro forceps the maximum amount of tissue per biopsy specimen
                    was 1 mm3. The number of specimens taken was in the range of
                    10-18 samples per tumor. The tissue sampling procedure was guided by
                    intra-operative smear preparations, which were routinely performed by the
                    attending neuropathologist: Only tumor probes next (i.e. 1 mm distance) to smear
                    preparations exclusively showing solid vital tumor tissue were selected for
                    molecular genetic analysis; a corresponding sample (level +1 mm), which was
                    taken for paraffin embedding and histopathological examination using standard
                    protocols [20], also had to show solid vital tumor tissue. The
                    described biopsy technique was chosen to minimize the risk of tissue
                    contamination (e.g. by non-neoplastic or necrotic tissue) and more importantly,
                    to recognize contamination, if it occurs. For the detection of potential
                    heterogeneity of MGMT promoter methylation and MGMT mRNA
                    expression throughout the solid tumor space, biopsy specimens selected for
                    molecular-genetic analyses were harvested from at least two different sites
                    along the chosen trajectory of each tumor in the biopsy group. Normal brain
                    (from 9 patients) was obtained from epilepsy surgery. One additional normal
                    brain sample mRNA was purchased from Ambion (Ambion, Austin, USA).
Combined RNA and DNA Isolation
A sequential purification procedure for both DNA and RNA was performed as being
                    published before [19]. Briefly, RNA was isolated using RNAqueous(r) Micro
                    Kit (Ambion(r), Austin, TX, USA), and in a second step DNA was extracted using
                    the QIAmp(r) DNA Micro Kit (Qiagen(r), Hilden, Germany) from the first
                    flow-through of RNA isolation following lysis of the sample. The quantity and
                    purity of the obtained nucleic acids was assessed using the NanoDrop(r)
                    ND-1000 spectrophotometer (NanoDrop(r), Wilmington, DE, USA).
Methylation-specific PCR (and sequencing analysis)
Exclusively histopathologically verified solid viable tumor tissue was used for
                    determination of MGMT promoter methylation and measurements of
                    transcriptional activity. Isolation of nucleic acids, bisulfite modification of
                    DNA, methylation-specific PCR (MSP) and sequencing analyses were performed as
                    being published in detail before [20]. In brief, DNA
                    isolation from tumor specimens was performed using commercially available
                    isolation kits followed by purification and bisulfite-modification of DNA [21]. For MSP
                    2 pairs of primers, each specific for either the methylated or the unmethylated
                        MGMT promoter region, were used as described by Esteller
                    and collegues [22]. Unmethylated versus methylated tumors were defined
                    as described by Grasbon-Frodl et al. [20].
Linear amplification and reverse transcription of RNA
20-50 ng of purified RNA of all samples were amplified using the
                    TargetAmp-Kit (Epicentre, Madison, Wisconsin, USA) according manufacturer's
                    recommendations in order to obtain RNA amounts suitable for gene expression
                    analyses [23].
                    The resulting amplification factors were between 500 and 2500. Hereafter, equal
                    amounts of the different samples of amplified RNA (1000 ng) were transcribed
                    into cDNA. The RT reaction was carried out using random primers and Superscript
                    III reverse transcriptase (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, USA), as per
                    manufacturer's instructions.
Real-time PCR
Real-time qPCR was performed in triplicates with the Light Cycler 480 instrument
                    (Roche Diagnostics, Mannheim, Germany) using Roche's qPCR Mastermix and
                    highly specific Universal ProbeLibrary assays (Roche Diagnostics). The following
                    primers were used: MGMT:
5'-
                        GTGATTTCTTACCAGCAATTAGCA-3' (forward primer),
                        5'-
                        CTGCTGCAGACCACTCTGTG-3' (reverse primer); Probe:
                    Universal ProbeLibrary probe: #52. TBP: 5'-
                        GAACATCATGGATCAGAACAACA-3' (forward primer),
                        5'-
                        ATAGGGATTCCGGGAGTCAT-3' (reverse primer); Probe:
                    Universal ProbeLibrary probe: # 87. SDHA:
5'-
                        GAGGCAGGGTTTAATACAGCA-3' (forward primer),
                        5'-
                        CCAGTTGTCCTCCTCCATGT-3' (reverse primer); Probe:
                    Universal ProbeLibrary probe: # 132. DNMT1: 5'- GATGTGGCGTCTGTGAGGT-3'
                    (forward primer), 5'-
                        CCTTGCAGGCTTTACATTTCC-3' (reverse primer); Probe:
                    Universal ProbeLibrary probe: # 66. DNMT3a:
5'- ACTACATCAGCAAGCGCAAG
                        -3' (forward primer), 5'- CACAGCATTCATTCCTGCAA-3'
                    (reverse primer); Probe: Universal ProbeLibrary probe: # 75.
                        DNMT3b:
5'-
                        CCGAGAACAAATGGCTTCAG-3' (forward primer),
                        5'-
                        TTCCTGCCACAAGACAAACA-3' (reverse primer); Probe:
                    Universal ProbeLibrary probe: # 64. All assays were designed intron-spanning.
                    The thermal cycler conditions comprised 45 cycles of 95degC for 10 s, 60degC
                    for 30 s, and 72degC for 15 s. Relative mRNA expression was calculated with
                    the Relative Quantification Software (Roche Diagnostics) using an
                    efficiency-corrected algorithm with standard curves and reference gene
                    normalization against SDHA and TBP (inclusion
                    of a third housekeeping gene (ACTB) led to similar results); These two
                    housekeeping genes have previously been shown to be appropriate for
                    normalization in human glioma and normal brain tissue [23].
Statistical analysis
The reference point of this study was the date of surgery. Primary endpoint was
                    progression free survival (PFS). Secondary endpoints were overall survival (OS)
                    and treatment response (TR). We assumed the predictive impact of mRNA expression
                    to be at least as high as the impact of the MGMT promoter
                    methylation status. Values of MGMT mRNA expression in the biopsy group usually
                    referred to the mean of the expression data obtained from different sites of
                    each tumor. The median of the MGMT mRNA expression of the entire tumor group was
                    used as the cut-off value for definition of the high and the low MGMT mRNA
                    expression group. Based on a previous study of our group [24] we expected a hazard ratio of
                    0.45 or even less in favor of the group harboring a methylated
                        MGMT promoter and/or low MGMT mRNA expression. Accordingly,
                    a sample size in the range of 28 patients in each group was estimated to be
                    sufficient to have a power of 80% to demonstrate a significant difference
                    in PFS in favor of malignant glioma with a methylated MGMT
                    promoter and/or low mRNA expression.
PFS and OS were analyzed by the Kaplan-Meier method [25] and compared with the
                    two-sided log-rank test. TR was evaluated after three cycles of TMZ monotherapy
                    according to the McDonald criteria [15]. The Cox model was
                    fitted to asses the prognostic value of the MGMT methylation
                    status, MGMT mRNA expression, and other potential prognostic factors. First, the
                    importance of each variable was tested univariately. Forward and backward
                    step-wise proportional hazards modelling was performed to assess the relative
                    and independent prognostic capacity of each parameter. In case of strong
                    interrelationships between covariates, several models were tested and compared
                    with each other (by computing the maximized likelihood). The association between
                    prognostic factors and TR was analyzed with logistic regression models. The
                    distribution of patient- and tumor-related variables between
                        MGMT promoter methylated and unmethylated subgroups was
                    analyzed by the chi-squared statistics (for dichotomized variables) and the
                    Wilcoxon test (for continuously scaled variables). In the biopsy group, pair
                    wise comparison of MGMT mRNA data at distant tumor sites was done with the
                    paired T-test. P<=0.05 was considered significant. All calculations were
                    performed using the SAS software package (version 9.2)
Validation of dependency between MGMT mRNA expression and MGMT
                    promoter methylation status was performed using data from The Cancer Genome
                    Atlas (TCGA) database (http:tcga.cancer.gov). TCGA
                    glioblastoma samples were supplied by the Broad Institute at the Massachusetts
                    Institute of Technology and the USC Epigenome Center, University of Southern
                    California, USA using the Affymetrix HG-U133A microarray and Illumina Infinium
                    Human DNA Methylation 27 beach chip technology. A total of 209 GBM-samples
                    containing both methylation and gene expression data for the
                        MGMT gene was extracted. As level 3 data was used, no
                    additional statistical preprocessing was necessary. The data encompass a total
                    of 20 methylation sites within the MGMT-gene. For consistency
                    with our molecular-genetic analyses, only methylation sites were considered that
                    correlated best with gene expression as described by Everhard et
                        al.
[10] and map
                    to the genomic region covered by the MSP-primers. Beta-values of the remaining
                    methylation sites were averaged for each sample. The median of the beta-values
                    was chosen as the cut-off to classify a sample as being either methylated or
                    non-methylated.

Results
Patient characteristics
A total of 63 patients (33 men, 30 women) with a median age of 59 years (range,
                    25-80 years) were included (Table 1). The median KPS was 70 (range, 60-90). Nineteen
                    patients had deep-seated tumor locations and 30 patients harvested left-sided
                    tumors. Thirty-seven patients underwent molecular stereotactic biopsy procedures
                    (including all patients with AA). Complete tumor resection - as determined
                    by early postoperative MRI - was achieved in 13/26 patients treated with
                    open tumor resection. Histological evaluation revealed a GBM in 53 patients and
                    an AA in 10 patients. All patients were assessable for both determination of the
                        MGMT methylation status and MGMT mRNA expression analyses.
                    Treatment included a median number of 6 TMZ cycles for the whole study
                    population, which caused grade 1/2 toxicity in 17 patients and grade 3 toxicity
                    in 2 patients.
MGMT promoter methylation and MGMT mRNA expression
From one single biopsy specimen around 150-800 ng of RNA (260:280
                    ratio between 1.8 and 2.1) and 1.5-2 ug DNA were harvested, mainly
                    depending on the size of the individual biopsy specimen. The overall frequency
                    of MGMT promoter methylation was 45% (32/63 patients).
                    8/10 patients with AA and 24/53 patients with a GBM exhibited a methylated
                        MGMT promoter (Table 1). The overall median of the MGMT mRNA
                    distribution was 0.45 (range: 0.04-1.2). In thirty-three tumors of the
                    biopsy group at least two samples per tumor (collected from distant sites) were
                    available for both determination of the MGMT promoter
                    methylation status and expression analyses (overall number of tissue specimens:
                    72); the mean distance between the chosen biopsy sites was 9 mm (range
                    3-38 mm). In the remaining four tumors only one tissue sample was used for
                    molecular-genetic analysis, as the corresponding second ones were suspected to
                    be contaminated by necrotic tissue/blood and/or non-neoplastic tissue (as
                    assumed by the results of both the intraoperative and paraffin embedded analyses
                    of specimens in the direct vicinity of these tissue samples). The
                        MGMT promoter methylation profile was homogeneous
                    throughout the viable solid tumor space of those 33 tumors investigated. MSP and
                    bisulfite sequencing exhibited always concordant results. Pairwise comparison of
                    MGMT mRNA expression at different intra-tumoral positions revealed no
                    significant differences (p = 0.79, data not shown).
The median of the low expression group (less equal 0.45) was 0.25, whereas it was
                    0.8 in the high expression group (>0.45) of the whole study population.
                    Normal brain exhibited the highest expression levels of MGMT mRNA (median: 1.1,
                    p<0.001, Figure 1).
10.1371/journal.pone.0017156.g001
Figure 1
MGMT mRNA expression and MGMT promoter methylation status in
                            malignant glioma.
Horizontal bars indicate medians. The dotted line indicates the cut-off
                            value distinguishing low from high MGMT expression values.
                                A: Expression of MGMT determined with quantitative
                            real-time PCR in non-cancerous brain tissue specimen (1,
                            N = 10), in malignant glioma (2,
                            N = 63), and in the glioma group stratified by
                                MGMT promoter methylation status (methylated, 3,
                            N = 32, and unmethylated, 4,
                            N = 31). cDNA was synthesized from amplified RNA
                            purified from tumor tissue obtained by stereotactic biopsy or open
                            surgery and relative expression of MGMT with respect to expression of
                            the reference genes SDHA and TBP was
                            determined using real-time PCR. B: Validation set obtained
                            from the TCGA database. All data were derived from array analyses and
                            expression levels of methylated (3, N = 105) and
                            unmethylated (4, N = 104) GBM tissue samples are
                            shown.
GBM subpopulations that underwent either cytoreductive surgery or stereotactic
                    biopsy did not differ in terms of age, KPS, MGMT promoter
                    methylation status, levels of MGMT mRNA expression, applied chemotherapy cycles,
                    and the follow up period. Left sided and/or multifocal tumors were significantly
                    more frequently seen in patients undergoing biopsy only (p<0.01). Patients
                    with AA were significantly younger (median, 55 versus 62 years; p<0.05),
                    showed more frequently a methylated MGMT promoter and low
                    expression levels of MGMT mRNA. GBM subpopulations with either a methylated or
                    unmethylated MGMT promoter and/or either low or high expression
                    levels of MGMT mRNA did not differ with regard to patients'
                    characteristics. The frequency of MGMT promoter methylation and
                    MGMT mRNA expression levels was nearly identical in patients undergoing biopsy
                    only and open tumor resection (data not shown). The degree of MGMT mRNA
                    expression strongly correlated with the MGMT promoter
                    methylation status (p<0.0001): The median of the mRNA expression distribution
                    in methylated and unmethylated tumors was 0.26 (range: 0.04-0.78) and 0.8
                    (range: 0.35-1.2), respectively (Figure 1). Discordant findings were seen in
                    12 (19%) patients: MGMT promoter methylation was
                    associated with high mRNA expression (>0.45) levels in 6 patients (median:
                    0.58, range 0.46-0.78), whereas low expression levels were seen (<=0.45)
                    in another 6 patients harboring an unmethylated MGMT promoter
                    (median: 0.39 range 0.15-0.45). Noteworthy, discordant findings only
                    concerned patients with GBM.
Nearly identical results were obtained by analyzing a publicly available dataset
                    of the TCGA database; 104 out of 209 GBM tissue samples were methylated. The
                    overall median of the MGMT mRNA expression was 5.57 and was congruously used to
                    classify a high and a low expression group. Consistent with our findings,
                        MGMT gene expression was strongly associated with
                    methylation status with a median of 4.92 (range 3.79-7.38) for methylated
                    and 6.19 (range 4.77-7.78) for unmethylated samples (p<0.001, Figure 1b). Discordant
                    findings were observed in 46 of 209 samples (22%), which is in accordance
                    to our data (19%). Differences in the range of expression values result
                    from the two different technologies and normalization techniques used (real-time
                    PCR vs. array data).
DNMTs mRNA expression
The mRNA levels of DNMT1, DNMT3a and DNMT3b were analysed in 63 malignant glioma
                    and 10 normal brain samples. Both in normal brain tissue and in tumors DNMT1 was
                    found to be the most expressed methyltransferase (more than 10-fold more
                    expressed than DNMT3a and DNMT3b, Figure 2A). In tumor tissue as compared to normal brain, DNMT1 and
                    DNMT3b were significantly upregulated (DNMT1: 2.5-fold, DNMT3b: 3.2-fold,
                    p<0.001, Figure 2B); the
                    degree of upregulation did not correlate with MGMT promoter
                    methylation status and MGMT mRNA expression. For DNMT3a only a trend towards
                    upregulation was detected (1.6-fold, p<0.05); however, the degree of
                    upregulation was more pronounced when stratifying tumors by
                        MGMT methylation status: Unmethylated tumors exhibited
                    significant higher DNMT3a mRNA levels than methylated tumors
                    (p = 0.003), and in unmethylated tumors, DNMT3a expression
                    was 2.3-fold increased (p<0.001) as compared to normal brain (Figure 2B). The subgroup
                    analysis of patients with GBM revealed identical results (data not shown).
10.1371/journal.pone.0017156.g002
Figure 2
Expression of DNMTs in non-cancerous brain tissue specimen and in
                            malignant glioma.
cDNA was synthesized from amplified RNA purified from tumor tissue
                            obtained by stereotactic biopsy or open surgery and expression of DNMTs
                            was determined using real-time PCR. A: Expression pattern
                            of DNMTs in normal brain tissue (1, N = 10) and in
                            high grade glioma (2, N = 63). DNMT mRNA expression
                            is calculated relative to the reference genes SDHA and
                                TBP (*, p>0.01). B: Expression
                            of DNMTs in non-cancerous brain tissue specimen (1,
                            N = 10), in high grade glioma (2,
                            N = 63), and in the glioma group stratified by
                                MGMT promoter methylation status (methylated, 3,
                            N = 32; unmethylated, 4,
                            N = 31). All data were normalized to the reference
                            genes SDHA and TBP, and the fold change of every DNMT relative to the
                            median expression in the normal brain samples (arbitrarily set to 1) was
                            calculated. Horizontal bars indicate medians.
Clinical outcome
The median follow up time was 10.5 months for the survivors. Forty out of 63
                    patients exhibited tumor progression and 24 patients died. Death was
                    tumor-related in all patients. No patient was lost to follow up. Fifty-seven
                    patients underwent XRT/TMZ-TMZ treatment and 6 patients with AA primary TMZ
                    chemotherapy, respectively. Kaplan-Meier estimates for PFS and OS of the whole
                    study population are presented in Figure 3A. Treatment response (partial remission or stable disease)
                    was seen in 38/63 patients. Clinical outcome was in favor of
                        MGMT promoter methylated tumors and low MGMT mRNA
                    expression: Overall, early treatment response was significantly associated with
                    low MGMT expression (p = 0.004), whereas the influence of
                        MGMT promoter methylation was less pronounced
                    (p = 0.02) and even lost for the subgroup of patients with
                    GBM; In the GBM subgroup 19/24 patients with low expression and 12/29 patients
                    with high expression exhibited tumor control or tumor shrinkage three months
                    after XRT/TMZ (p<0.01). Overall, treatment responders experienced a longer OS
                    than non-responders (one year survival rate: 86% vs. 30%,
                    p<0.0001). Promoter methylation correlated with both superior median PFS
                    (18.3 versus 4.9 months) and OS (>22 versus 9.6 months; p<0.0001; Figure 3B). Among patients
                    with a methylated MGMT promoter the unadjusted hazard ratio for
                    disease progression and death was 0.22 (95% confidence interval:
                    0.11-0.46) and 0.2 (95% confidence interval: 0.1-0.47).
                    Stratification for low (<=0.45) vs. high (>0.45) MGMT mRNA expression
                    levels also resulted in a strong correlation with median PFS (17.5 vs. 5 months)
                    and OS (>20 vs. 9.5 months, p<0.0001, Figures 4A, 4B); The unadjusted hazard ratio
                    for disease progression and death was 0.32 (95% confidence interval:
                    0.14-0.5) and 0.15 (95% confidence interval: 0.06-0.35).
                    Exclusion of anaplastic tumors resulted in nearly identical results concerning
                    the prognostic/predictive impact of both MGMT promoter
                    methylation and MGMT mRNA expression (data not shown). In the subgroup of GBM
                    patients with discordant findings stratification for mRNA expression resulted in
                    significant differences for both PFS and OS in case of a methylated
                        MGMT promoter: Methylated tumors with high mRNA expression
                    (N = 6) resulted in both shorter PFS (p<0.001, Figure 4C) and OS (p<0.001,
                        Figure 4D) than those
                    with low mRNA expression (N = 18): median PFS and OS was
                    17.5 months and 21.6 month for the low-expression group, whereas it was 3.3
                    months and 10.4 months for the high expression group; PFS and OS were similar to
                    that of unmethylated tumors with high MGMT mRNA expression (p>0.3).
                    Conversely, unmethylated GBMs with low mRNA expression
                    (N = 6) did better than those with high mRNA expression
                    (N = 21, data not shown) in term of PFS, and OS; the
                    differences, however, were statistically not significant
                    (p = 0.06); Both PFS and OS was not significantly different
                    to that of methylated tumors with low mRNA expression (p>0.15).
10.1371/journal.pone.0017156.g003
Figure 3
Kaplan-Meier estimates of 63 patients with malignant glioma.
Tumor tissue obtained either by stereotactic biopsy or by open surgery.
                                A: Progression free survival and overall survival of
                            the whole study population, B: Overall survival stratified
                            by the MGMT promoter methylation status.
10.1371/journal.pone.0017156.g004
Figure 4
Kaplan-Meier estimates of patients with malignant glioma stratified
                            by MGMT mRNA expression.
Tumor tissue obtained either by stereotactic biopsy or by open surgery
                                A: Progression free survival
                            (N = 63), B: Overall survival
                            (N = 63), C: Progression free survival
                            of patients with methylated GBMs (N = 24)
                                D: Survival of patients with methylated GBMs
                            (N = 24).
Prognostic factors
Univariately, MGMT promoter methylation
                    (p = 0.0001), low mRNA (p = 0.0004)
                    expression, AA histology (p<0.05) were positively correlated with both
                    increased PFS and OS. Open tumor resection gained prognostic relevance in the
                    subgroup of patients with GBM (p = 0.03). No association
                    was seen between mRNA expression of DNMTs and clinical outcome. Multivariate
                    models including mRNA expression reached a fit as good as those including
                        MGMT promoter methylation; it allowed, however, the
                    inclusion of additional variables such as histology and type of surgery (Table 2). The adjusted
                    hazard ratios of MGMT promoter methylation and mRNA expression
                    for PFS and OS were consistent with the unadjusted hazard ratios.

Discussion
Daily clinical practise sometimes indicates discordance between expectations derived
                from MGMT promoter methylation and outcome, and one more recently
                published study on transcriptional activity in glioblastomas has questioned
                mechanisms of "direct" transcriptional repression by
                    MGMT promoter methylation for a considerable number of tumors:
                Unmethylated (methylated) tumors were found to express low (high) levels of MGMT
                mRNA in 15% of the study population [10]. The results of the current
                study are in line with the findings described by Everhard et al.
                and an additionally performed analysis of an independent validation dataset
                extracted from the TCGA database. Furthermore, we demonstrate that MGMT mRNA is
                homogeneously expressed throughout the solid tumor of malignant gliomas, can be
                reliably determined even from small sized biopsy specimens, is strongly correlated
                with outcome measurements (even for those with discordant findings), and plays a
                direct role for mediating tumor sensitivity to alkylating agents. Overall, patients
                with low MGMT mRNA expression scores did significantly better in terms of TR, PFS,
                and OS than those with high expression scores. In particular, MGMT mRNA expression
                retained influence even in those with discordant findings (19% of the
                series): 6 patients harbouring methylated tumors with high MGMT mRNA expression
                scores did significantly worse in terms of PFS and OS than their 26 counterparts
                with concordant findings; outcome was similar to that of unmethylated tumors with
                high MGMT mRNA expression. A similar pattern was seen in 6 patients with an
                unmethylated MGMT promoter and low MGMT mRNA expression. More data
                are needed to support the hypothesis that in case of discordant findings expression
                data could powerfully predict outcome independent of the MGMT
                promoter methylation status.
Concerning the mechanisms underlying the discordant findings, it may be hypothesized
                that a high MGMT mRNA expression despite a methylated promoter might be due to
                overruling factors such as increased NF-kB activity [26]; low MGMT
                expression levels combined with an unmethylated promoter might result from
                transcript destabilization and/or transcription-repressing factors, such as miRNA
                regulation or histone modifications. However, these issues need to be investigated
                and in this context, the here described evaluation of MGMT transcriptional activity
                might be a useful tool. The significant higher MGMT mRNA expression in normal brain
                (which exhibits an unmethylated MGMT promoter) as compared to that
                of unmethylated tumors also indicates the existence of further mechanisms regulating
                MGMT expression beyond promoter methylation.
As MSP and bisulfite sequencing do not cover all possible CpG sites of the
                    MGMT promoter, it cannot be excluded that omissions of
                functionally relevant CpG sites may have partly accounted for the detected
                discrepancies [27]. However, even though some CpG regions have been shown to
                reflect somewhat better MGMT expression (range of concordant results:
                72-85%) in one more recent study [10], no statistically significant
                difference could be detected for any of the CpG regions investigated: All CpG sites
                (including those studied by MSP) were highly correlated with MGMT mRNA
                expression.
As aberrant DNMT expression has been observed in several tumor tissues which might
                - at least in part - explain epigenetic silencing of selected genes, we
                estimated the expression of DNMTs in tumor tissue as compared to normal brain, its
                prognostic/predictive relevance, and its correlation with both the
                    MGMT promoter methylation status and MGMT mRNA expression data.
                In mammals, CGI methylation processes are regulated by DNMT1 (maintenance of DNA
                methylation pattern) and DNMT3a and DNMT3b (de novo methylation)
                    [28].
                Aberrant DNMT expression has been observed in various tumor entities relative to
                normal tissue samples, indicating deregulation of methylation processes in these
                tumors. For some tumor entities, such as lung carcinoma [29], [30], a correlation between DNMT
                expression and clinical course was shown. Data describing DNMT mRNA expression in
                malignant glioma are extremely scarce, indicating an up-regulation of at least DNMT1
                and DNMT3b in GBM tissue samples as compared to normal brain [31]. Neither the
                prognostic/predictive impact of DNMT expression in malignant glioma nor its
                association with MGMT promoter methylation has been analyzed so
                far. In the current study, we show that in malignant glioma DNMT1 and DNMT3b were
                significantly upregulated, as compared to normal brain. The degree of upregulation,
                however, did neither correlate with outcome measurements, nor with
                    MGMT promoter methylation status or MGMT mRNA expression. For
                DNMT3a, only a slight upregulation was detected. Interestingly, unmethylated tumors
                exhibited significantly higher DNMT3a mRNA levels than methylated tumors. Hence,
                regulation of the MGMT CGI methylation by DNMT3a appears
                unlikely.
Taken together, the significant upregulation of DNMT1 and DNMT3b indicates their
                involvement in CGI methylation processes in malignant glioma. However, lack of
                correlation with clinical outcome makes it reasonable to assume that yet unknown
                additional mechanisms contribute to the degree of MGMT promoter
                methylation. This aspect certainly deserves further investigation.
Methodological considerations
We previously showed that MSP and sequence analysis of bisulfite-modified DNA for
                    the determination of the MGMT promoter methylation status
                    revealed identical and reproducible results throughout the solid tumor space,
                    even for small amounts of starting DNA as are obtained from a single
                        1-mm3 stereotactic biopsy sample of a malignant glioma [20],
                        [24]. In the
                    current series a previously described new method of combined isolation technique
                        [19] of both
                    RNA and DNA from a single 1-mm3 stereotatcatic biopsy sample was used
                    for the first time for MSP, sequence analysis and qPCR. As the extraction of
                    high-quality RNA is the limiting factor in the combined isolation of DNA and
                    RNA, a protocol was used that starts with RNA purification followed by DNA
                    recovery. DNA recovery was approximately 30% reduced compared with
                    routine extraction techniques (i.e. 0.5-1 ug vs 1-1.5 ug
                    from a 1-mm3 sample) suggesting that there is a significant DNA loss
                    in the RNA isolation procedure. This loss of DNA, however, appears less relevant
                    for tumors with increased cellularity (such as malignant gliomas). In the
                    current series tissue specimens were snap frozen or processed directly upon
                    withdrawal to guarantee high quality of RNA. qPCR experiments were performed
                    according to the newest MIQE (Minimum Information for Publication of
                    Quantitative Real-Time PCR Experiments) guidelines [32]: All qPCR reactions were
                    efficiency corrected and data were normalized to the geometric mean of two
                    reference genes being determined as suitable for gene expression analyses in
                    human glioma and in glioma compared to normal brain tissue in one of our
                    previous studies [23]. The similar rate of MGMT promoter
                    methylation and the similar degree of MGMT mRNA and DNMTs expression in tissue
                    samples obtained from both open tumor resection and molecular stereotactic
                    biopsy technique, and, additionally, the reproducibility of these findings
                    throughout the solid tumor space underscored the validity of the applied
                    methods. It was shown that the applied biopsy technique allows avoiding the
                    contamination of tumor tissue by non-neoplastic tissue in the vast majority of
                    tumors of this series and, more importantly, to recognize contamination if it
                    occurs. It has been reported that lymphocytes, endothelial cells and other types
                    of intra-tumoral non-neoplastic cells such as macrophages/microglias harbouring
                    all an unmethylated MGMT promoter might easily bias the
                    determination of both the MGMT promoter methylation status and
                    MGMT mRNA expression analysis [33]. The reproducibility of our results throughout the
                    solid tumor space, however, indicates that the impact of these intra-tumoral
                    non-neoplastic cells must be considered minor as compared to that of the solid
                    viable tumor tissue component. However, given the high expression of MGMT mRNA
                    in normal brain the necessity for collecting tissue samples in a highly
                    controlled fashion is underscored [33]. Results concerning the role
                    of MGMT protein expression have been shown to be not conclusive with regard to
                    its correlation with MGMT promoter methylation, MGMT mRNA
                    expression, and outcome measurements; inter-observer variability of IHC
                    evaluation, and varying specificity and sensitivity of antibodies might
                    contribute to the observed discrepancies [7]-[9].
Taken together our results show, in accordance to current clinical experience,
                    that MGMT promoter methylation status alone does not suffice to
                    provide information about the anticipated clinical course in malignant glioma
                    patients undergoing chemotherapy with alkylating agents. Discordant findings
                    between MGMT promoter methylation status and MGMT mRNA
                    expression underscore the necessity to elucidate methylation-independent
                    mechanisms that may regulate MGMT expression.
