[Abstract, Introduction, Results, Discussion, Methods, Mixed]

A Mosaic Mouse Model of Astrocytoma Identifies ?v?8 Integrin as an Essential Regulator of Tumor-Induced Angiogenesis. The process of angiogenesis involves a complex set of cell-cell and cell-extracellular matrix (ECM) interactions that coordinately regulate new blood vessel growth and maturation. Although many factors that promote angiogenesis have been characterized, the identities and mechanisms of action of many endogenous inhibitors of angiogenesis remain unclear. Furthermore, little is known about how tumor cells selectively circumvent the actions of these inhibitors to drive pathological angiogenesis, a requisite event for tumor progression. Using mosaic mouse models of the malignant brain cancer, astrocytoma, we report that tumor cells induce pathological angiogenesis by suppressing expression of the ECM protein receptor avb8 integrin. Diminished integrin expression in astrocytomas cells leads to reduced activation of latent TGFbs, resulting in impaired TGFb receptor signaling events in tumor-associated endothelial cells. These data reveal that astrocytoma cells manipulate their angiogenic balance by selectively suppressing avb8 integrin expression/function, and also demonstrate that an adhesion and signaling axis normally involved in developmental brain angiogenesis is pathologically exploited in adult brain tumors.

Introduction
The mammalian brain is a highly vascularized organ, with neural cells and blood vessels communicating via direct cell-cell contacts as well as secreted growth factors and ECM proteins (Bautch and James, 2009; McCarty, 2009a). Integrins are cell surface receptors for many ECM ligands (Desgrosellier and Cheresh, 2010), and integrin-mediated adhesion and signaling events play vital roles in vascular development and homeostasis in the brain (McCarty, 2009b). In particular, the neuroepithelial cell-expressed integrin, avb8, is essential for normal blood vessel growth and maturation during brain development (McCarty et al., 2002; Zhu et al., 2002). Selective ablation of av or b8 integrin gene expression in embryonic mouse neural progenitors and astrocytes causes brain-specific vascular phenotypes, including endothelial cell hyperplasia, the formation of blood vessels with glomeruloid-like tufts, and intracerebral hemorrhage (McCarty et al., 2004; Proctor et al., 2005). avb8 integrin is a receptor for latent forms of TGFb1 and TGFb3 and mediates their bioactivation (Cambier et al., 2005). Perturbation of integrin-mediated activation of latent TGFb1 and TGFb3, leads to brain-specific vascular defects that phenocopy the pathologies in integrin knockouts (Mu et al., 2008). Hence, avb8 integrin-mediated TGFb activation and signaling controls normal cerebral blood vessel morphogenesis and blood-brain barrier development.
In the post-natal brain avb8 integrin is expressed in neural stem and progenitor cells (Mobley et al., 2009), which are likely cells of origin for the malignant brain cancer astrocytoma (Alcantara Llaguno et al., 2009; Zheng et al., 2008). High-grade astrocytomas, or glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), are defined in part by the development of hallmark angiogenesis pathologies, including vascular cell hyperproliferation and hemorrhage owing to breakdown of the intratumoral blood-brain barrier (Jain et al., 2007; Kaur et al., 2004). As detailed above, these tumor-induced vascular pathologies are strikingly similar to phenotypes that develop in mice that are genetically deficient for avb8 integrin-mediated activation of TGFb1 and TGFb3. Whether astrocytoma cells manipulate integrin-mediated TGFb activation and signaling pathways to induce pathological angiogenesis, however, remains uncertain. Here, we report that diminished avb8 integrin expression and function in astrocytoma cells plays a central role in promoting pathological angiogenesis and abnormal vascular permeability. These results are the first to link deregulation of avb8 integrin function to vascular pathologies that are defining features of high-grade astrocytomas.

Results
Analysis of avb8 integrin protein expression in human astrocytoma cell lines
Based on the brain-specific angiogenesis phenotypes that develop in av and b8 integrin knockout mice, we hypothesized that abnormal avb8 integrin expression or function may also contribute to angiogenesis pathologies in malignant brain tumors. Therefore, lysates from five established human astrocytoma cell lines were immunoblotted to determine expression levels of av and b8 integrin proteins. As shown in Figure 1A, differing levels of b8 integrin protein expression were detected in the various human cell lines. U87 and LN18 cells expressed low levels of b8 integrin, whereas LN229, U251, and SNB19 astrocytoma cells expressed robust levels of b8 integrin protein. av integrin protein levels were constant in the different astrocytoma cell lines, likely owing to the reported expression of other integrin b subunits, e. g., b3 and b5, that heterodimerize with av integrin (Skuli et al., 2009). In order to establish in vivo links between b8 integrin protein levels and tumor-induced angiogenesis, U87 cells or SNB19 cells were stereotactically injected into the brains of immunocompromised mice. All mice injected with U87 cells (n=5, 5 x 105 cells per mouse) developed neurological deficits within six weeks post-injection. Macroscopic analyses of perfused brains revealed large, well-vascularized and hemorrhagic primary tumors that filled most of the injected hemisphere (Supplemental Figure 1A). Immunohistochemical analyses of sections from U87 tumors using an antibody directed against the endothelial cell-expressed protein CD34 revealed intratumoral blood vessels with distended and sinusoidal-like morphologies (Figure 1C). Mice implanted with SNB19 cells (n=3, 5 x 105 cells injected per mouse) also developed neurological phenotypes within six weeks after implantation; however, intracranial SNB19 tumors were not macroscopically apparent (Supplemental Figure 1B). Microscopic analysis of H&E-stained brain sections from SNB19 tumor-bearing mice revealed focal lesions, often in periventricular regions of the brain (Figure 1D). Anti-CD34 immunohistochemistry (Figures 1E) revealed that microvessels within SNB19 tumors were relatively uniform in diameter, non-hemorrhagic, and morphologically distinct from vessels in U87 tumors (Figure 1C).
Isolation of Primary Astroglial Progenitor Cells from Wild Type and b8-/- Neonatal Mice
Although the analyses of the human astrocytoma cell lines and resulting xenograft tumors suggest intriguing connections between b8 integrin expression and intratumoral vascular pathologies (Figure 1), there are many limitations associated with studying glioma cell lines. For example, these various cell lines have been sequentially passaged over several years, harbor different genetic alterations, and do not express markers commonly expressed in astrocytomas in situ (Ishii et al., 1999). Therefore, we decided to analyze functions for b8 integrin in tumor-induced angiogenesis using a more genetically tractable model of astrocytoma.
Astroglial cells, which are putative cells of origin for astrocytomas, were cultured from cerebral cortices of post-natal wild type (+/+) or b8 integrin homozygous (b8-/-) mutant mice. Newborn b8-/- mice were easily distinguished from control littermates by macroscopically apparent intracerebral hemorrhage (Figure 2A and 2C); however, all genotypes were confirmed by PCR-based methods using genomic DNA isolated from tail snips as previously described (Zhu et al., 2002). As shown in Figures 2B and 2D, nearly all wild type and b8-/- primary cells were immunoreactive for Nestin, a marker for neural progenitor cells in the brain (Stipursky and Gomes, 2007). Most cells also expressed glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), a marker for differentiated astrocytes and some neural stem cells within the post-natal brain (Mori et al., 2005). Based on co-expression of Nestin and GFAP in the majority of cells, we will refer to these cells throughout this report as 'astroglial progenitors'. In order to determine avb8 integrin protein expression in primary astroglial progenitors, cells were surface-labeled with an amine-reactive derivative of biotin. Anti-integrin antibodies were then used to immunoprecipitate integrin proteins from detergent-soluble lysates. Primary wild type astroglial progenitors expressed avb5 and avb8 integrins (Figure 2E), which is consistent with previous reports for av integrin expression in primary human astrocytes (Cambier et al., 2005). b8-/- astroglial progenitors expressed avb5 integrin protein at levels similar to wild type cells, but did not express the avb8 integrin heterodimer, owing to b8 integrin gene ablation (Figure 2E). avb1, avb3 and avb6 integrins were not detected in primary astroglial progenitor cells isolated from wild type and knockout mice (data not shown). Lastly, primary wild type and b8-/- cells did not display obvious differences in proliferation under adherent growth conditions (Figure 2F).
Oncogene-Mediated Transformation of Primary Astroglial Progenitor Cells Leads to Diminished avb8 Integrin Expression
Astroglial progenitors were immortalized and transformed using retroviral-delivered oncogenes that target growth pathways commonly altered during astrocytoma initiation and progression. Cells were first immortalized with a retrovirus expressing the human papilloma virus E6 and E7 proteins (Sonoda et al., 2001b), which inhibit the expression and function of the p53 and Rb tumor suppressors, respectively. The p53 gene is commonly mutated or deleted in human gliomas (Furnari et al., 2007); furthermore, both Rb and p53 negatively regulate the functions of the Ink4a/Arf tumor suppressors, which are commonly deleted in malignant astrocytomas (Bachoo et al., 2002; Uhrbom et al., 2002). Pooled populations of immortalized cells were then transformed using a retrovirus expressing oncogenic H-Ras (G12VH-Ras) (Sonoda et al., 2001b). Ras activities are often hyperactivated in astrocytomas, owing to gene mutations or elevated expression of upstream receptor tyrosine kinases (Holland et al., 2000). Two independent preparations of wild type and b8-/- transformed cells were generated using primary cells isolated from different neonatal mice. All in vitro and in vivo results presented below represent one of the two preparations; however, parallel experiments with the second preparation of transformed cells generated similar outcomes (data not shown).
Oncogene-transformed astroglial progenitors maintained Nestin protein expression (Figures 3A, B). Immunoblot analyses confirmed similar levels of Ras and E7 protein overexpression in transformed cells (Figure 3C). We detected increased expression of CD133/Prominin-1, a transmembrane protein that marks some embryonic neural stem cells (Uchida et al., 2000) and tumor-initiating cells in GBM and other solid malignancies (Bao et al., 2006a; O'Brien et al., 2007; Singh et al., 2004) following cell transformation (Figure 3D). There was a complete loss of expression of GFAP following cell transformation; in contrast, Nestin protein levels remained unchanged (Figure 3D). This upregulation of CD133/Prominin-1 and down-regulation of GFAP expression suggests oncogene-induced cell "dedifferentiation", similar to what others have proposed for transformed astroglia (Bachoo et al., 2002; Uhrbom et al., 2002). Lastly, genetic ablation of b8 integrin did not alter adherent growth properties of transformed astroglial progenitor cells (Figure 3E), and wild type and b8-/- transformed cells also generated similar numbers of colonies in three-dimensional soft agar growth assays (Figure 3F).
Transformed wild type cells showed significantly reduced levels of av and b8 integrin proteins, although the levels of b1 integrin protein were not altered in wild type or b8-/- transformed cells (Figure 4A). Due to a dearth of b8 integrin antibodies available for fluorescent activated cell sorting, integrin expression was quantified in primary versus transformed cells using an anti-av antibody. As shown in Figure 4B, approximately 90% of wild type and b8-/- primary cells expressed detectable levels of cell surface av integrin protein. In contrast, oncogene-mediated transformation resulted in an approximately 50% reduction in av integrin protein expression (Figure 4B). Since b8 integrin heterodimerizes exclusively with the av subunit (Milner et al., 2001), the reduction in b8 protein levels in wild type transformed cells is likely due to reduced levels of av integrin protein; indeed, av protein levels are reduced in oncogene-transformed b8-/- cells (Figure 4B). We have also detected reduced levels of b5 integrin, which also heterodimerizes exclusively with av integrin, in wild type and b8-/- transformed astroglial cells (data not shown). Levels of avb8 integrin protein expression progressively diminished following sequential passaging of wild type transformed astroglial cells (Figure 4C). The diminished avb8 integrin protein expression in highly passaged transformed cells was not a secondary consequence of long-term growth in vitro, since we did not detect diminished integrin expression in sequentially passaged primary mouse neurospheres isolated from the post-natal subventricular zone (Supplemental Figure 2).
Analysis of b8 Integrin-Dependent Angiogenesis and Vascular Permeability
The ability of transformed astroglial progenitors to form astrocytoma-like tumors in vivo was analyzed by stereotactically implanting wild type and b8-/- cells into the striatum of immunocompromised mice. Due to the progressive loss of avb8 integrin expression in high-passage cells (Figure 4C), all studies were performed with cells cultured for less than four passages following oncogene transformation. All mice injected with either wild type or b8-/- transformed astroglial progenitors developed neurological phenotypes and died within 45 days after injection. Microscopic examination of brains injected with wild type and b8-/- transformed cells (n=20 mice per genotype) revealed tumor formation in 100% of experimental animals.
In comparison to wild type tumors, there were striking differences in the macroscopic appearance of tumors generated from transformed b8-/- astroglial progenitors (Figure 5A, B). Most b8-/- tumors (17 of 20 analyzed) displayed grossly obvious intratumoral hemorrhage; in contrast, only two of 20 wild type astrocytomas showed grossly obvious hemorrhage. Similar results were observed following the injection of transformed av-/- astroglial cells (data not shown). Kaplan-Meier survival plots revealed that mice with b8-/- tumors (n=16) died significantly earlier than mice harboring wild type tumors (n=20). As shown in Figure 5C, 50% of mice with b8-/- tumors were alive at 26 days post-implantation, whereas mice harboring wild type tumors showed 50% survival at 33 days. The most probable reason for the accelerated death of mice bearing b8-/- astrocytomas relates to the severe intratumoral hemorrhage in these animals. We have noticed that extravasated red blood cells accumulate in the brain ventricles and likely obstruct the flow of cerebrospinal fluid, leading to hydrocephalus and neurological deficits. In a separate cohort of mice, we compared tumor volumes at 14 and 21 days after intracranial injection of wild type and b8-/- transformed cells (n=9 mice per genotype per time point). Tumor volumes were quantified in H&E-stained brain sections by measuring tumor diameter at the largest cross-sectional area; however, no obvious differences were detected in sizes of tumors derived from wild type and b8-/- transformed cells at 14 and 21 days post-implantation (Figure 5D).
Microscopic analysis of H&E-stained tumor sections revealed that wild type tumors (Figure 6A) were highly vascularized and displayed pathological features similar to grade III anaplastic astrocytoma, consistent with previous reports (Sonoda et al., 2003; Sonoda et al., 2001a). H&E-stained sections from b8-/- tumors, however, revealed hemorrhagic blood vessels with tortuous and distended morphologies (Figure 6B). Both wild type and b8-/- intratumoral blood vessels were lined with CD34-expressing vascular endothelial cells (Figure 6C, D); however, immunofluorescence-based quantitation revealed significantly more CD34-expressing vessels within b8-/- tumors (Figure 6G). The severe vascular pathologies within b8-/- tumors made them more similar to grade IV GBM, although other defining features of human GBM, such as regions of pseudopallisading necrosis were not evident in b8-/- tumors (data not shown).
Pericytes are vascular mural cells that closely juxtapose endothelial cells and are necessary for normal blood vessel structure and function (Adams and Alitalo, 2007). Therefore, we analyzed whether microvascular pericytes were present in wild type and b8-/- astrocytomas. Most CD34-expressing endothelial cells in wild type astrocytomas were associated with Desmin+ pericytes (Figure 6E). b8-/- tumors displayed increased numbers of CD34-expressing blood vessels with distended and tortuous morphologies; however, vessels within b8-/- tumors were also associated with Desmin-expressing pericytes (Figure 6F).
Wild type or b8-/- tumor cells did not express detectable levels of GFAP in vivo, although non-malignant reactive astrocytes that formed a glial scar around the tumor margins displayed robust GFAP expression (Supplemental Figure 3C). Wild type and b8-/- cells maintained Nestin expression and displayed similar patterns of perivascular invasiveness (Supplemental Figure 3A, B).
Rescue of Vascular Pathologies by Forced Expression of b8 Integrin Protein in b8-/- Cells
In order to determine whether the vascular pathologies in b8-/- tumors were the direct result of loss of b8 integrin protein, or were due to integrin-independent effects on cell transformation, we restored b8 integrin protein expression in b8-/- cells using a plasmid expressing human b8 integrin protein tagged at the C-terminus with the V5 epitope. Protein expression was confirmed by immunoblotting with anti-b8 or anti-V5 antibodies (Figure 7A).
b8-/- cells stably transfected with empty pcDNA4 plasmid were stereotactically injected into the striatum of immunocompromised mice (n=5). Resulting intracranial tumors were hemorrhagic and contained dilated blood vessels (Figures 7B, D, F). In contrast, injection of b8-/- cells forcibly expressing b8V5 integrin protein (n=5 mice) generated tumors with blood vessels that were fairly uniform in size and non-hemorrhagic (Figures 7B, C, E). These data demonstrate that the severe vascular pathologies in b8-/- tumors are caused by loss of b8 integrin expression and function, and that these vascular defects can be largely reversed following exogenous expression of b8 integrin protein.
Analysis of Integrin-Dependent VEGF Expression
Prior reports demonstrated that VEGF plays important roles in pathological angiogenesis and hemorrhage within brain tumors (Benjamin and Keshet, 1997; Cheng et al., 1996; Cheng et al., 1997; Kanamori et al., 2004). Since these pathologies are similar to what we have observed in b8-/- astrocytomas (Figures 5 and 6), levels of VEGF mRNA and protein expression were analyzed in transformed astroglial progenitors and tumors. As shown in Supplemental Figure 4A, we detected decreased expression of the VEGF120 and VEGF164 mRNAs in b8-/-cells. Analysis of VEGF protein expression by ELISA also revealed approximately 50% less VEGF in conditioned media from b8-/- cells (Supplemental Figure 4B), further indicating that b8 integrin positively regulates VEGF gene expression. VEGF expression was also analyzed by immunoblotting detergent-soluble lysates prepared from wild type and b8-/- astrocytomas (n=2 tumors per genotype). However, we did not detect differences in VEGF protein expression (Supplemental Figure 4C), likely owing to VEGF expression by non-malignant stromal cells. Along these lines, immunofluorescence staining of wild type and b8-/- tumors with an anti-VEGF antibody revealed no obvious differences in VEGF protein expression (Supplemental Figure 4D, E).
Analysis of Integrin-Dependent TGFb Activation and Signaling
We next analyzed integrin-dependent TGFb expression, activation and receptor signaling in transformed astroglial cells and astrocytomas. Integrin-dependent differences in expression of TGFb1, TGFb2 and TGFb3 mRNAs in transformed cells were not obvious as assessed by semi-quantitative RT-PCR (data not shown). b8 integrin-mediated activation of latent TGFb1 was measured in vitro using luciferase reporter assays. Wild type or b8-/- transformed astrocytes were exposed to 10 ng/ml latent TGFb1 for 12 hours, and conditioned media was then added to mink lung epithelial cells stably transfected with a reporter plasmid containing a truncated plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) promoter driving expression of firefly luciferase (PAI1-luciferase) (Abe et al., 1994). As shown in Figure 8A (black bars), in comparison to conditioned media from wild type cells, there was a significant reduction (approximately 30%) in luciferase activity using conditioned media from b8-/- cells. These data reveal that avb8 integrin in astrocytoma cells promotes, in part, the activation of latent TGFb1. However, in the absence of LAP-TGFb1 a statistically significant increase in luciferase activity was detected using conditioned media from wild type and b8-/- transformed cells (grey bars in Figure 8A), suggesting integrin-independent mechanisms of latent TGFb activation.
We reasoned that the three-dimensional context of the brain tumor microenvironment might reveal more dramatic differences in integrin-dependent TGFb activation/signaling in vascular endothelial cells. Therefore, we analyzed TGFb signaling events in situ using an antibody directed against phosphorylated Smad3 (pSmad3) protein, a canonical TGFb signaling protein that translocates into the nucleus following TGFb receptor-mediated phosphorylation (Massague, 2008). As shown in Figure 8B, CD31+ blood vessels within b8 integrin-expressing astrocytomas displayed robust levels of nuclear pSmad3 protein. In contrast, most CD31+ blood vessels within b8-/- tumors expressed low or undetectable levels of nuclear pSmad3 (Figure 8C). In order to more quantitatively assess integrin-mediated TGFb signaling, vascular endothelial cells were sorted from tumors using magnetic beads coated with anti-CD31 antibodies. Freshly prepared cell lysates were then immunoblotted with antibodies directed against phosphorylated forms of Smad2 and Smad3. As shown in Figure 8D, a reduction in phosphorylation of Smad2/3 was apparent in CD31-expressing cells sorted from b8-/- tumors. Laser scanning densitometry was used to quantify the band intensities, revealing that vascular endothelial cells isolated from b8-/- tumors expressed two-fold less total Smad2/3 protein levels. These data suggest that avb8 integrin regulates Smad2/3 protein stability in endothelial cells. The phospho-Smad2/3 band intensities were then normalized to the total Smad2/3 levels; however, we still detected two-fold less pSmad2 and three-fold less pSmad3 in CD31 lysates from b8-/- tumors. These data reveal that the vascular pathologies in astrocytomas correlate with impaired integrin-mediated TGFb activation and signaling via Smad2 and Smad3 in intratumoral endothelial cells.

Discussion
A major conclusion from this study is that avb8 integrin, an ECM protein receptor that we have previously shown to be essential for embryonic brain angiogenesis, also plays a key role in regulating pathological angiogenesis astrocytomas growing in the adult brain. Our data reveal the following specific findings: (i) avb8 integrin is differentially expressed in human astrocytoma cell lines, with low levels of integrin expression correlating with increased intratumoral angiogenesis and hemorrhage (Figure 1); (ii) primary mouse astroglial progenitor cells, which are presumptive cells of origin for astrocytomas, express robust levels of avb8 integrin protein (Figure 2); (iii) oncogene-mediated transformation of astroglial progenitors results in a progressive reduction in avb8 integrin protein expression (Figures 3 and 4); (iv) stereotactic injection of transformed wild type astroglial progenitors generates grade III anaplastic astrocytomas, whereas b8-/- cells give rise to tumors with vascular pathologies similar to grade IV GBM (Figures 5 and 6); (v) the severe vascular pathologies in b8-/- tumors are largely ameliorated by exogenous expression of b8 integrin protein (Figure 7); and (vi) b8-/- astrocytoma cells are partially impaired in their ability to activate latent TGFbs and stimulate TGFb signaling pathways in tumor-associated vascular endothelial cells (Figure 8).
avb8 integrin-dependent interplay between TGFb and VEGF signaling pathways
avb8 integrin is expressed in astrocytes and neural stem cells in the adult mouse brain, where it negatively regulates blood vessel growth and permeability (Mobley et al., 2009). However, various reports have also shown that stem-like GBM cells, which are likely derived from neural stem cells and/or astrocytes, induce robust pathological angiogenesis to initiate and sustain tumor growth and progression (Bao et al., 2006b; Calabrese et al., 2007). We propose that one mechanism used by newly stem-like tumor cells to circumvent the negative regulatory effects of avb8 integrin and drive progression to more malignant stages is via down-regulating integrin expression and function. Diminished integrin expression, combined with expression of pro-angiogenesis factors, e.g., VEGF, likely promotes neovessel formation necessary for tumor growth and progression. VEGF overexpression alone, however, is not sufficient to generate vascular pathologies in GBM, suggesting the need for dysregulation of other pathways (Sonoda et al., 2003). Interestingly, TGFbs has been reported to inhibit the pro-angiogenic and pro-permeability actions of VEGF (Ramsauer and D'Amore, 2007). Here, we report a correlation between decreased integrin-mediated activation of latent TGFbs and TGFb signaling and enhanced angiogenesis and vascular permeability, (Figures 5-8), supporting a model whereby integrin-activated TGFbs counteract the effects of VEGF (Supplemental Figure 5). TGFb-mediated Smad3 phosphorylation in tumor cells has also been reported to enhance VEGF gene expression (Petersen et al.). Interestingly, b8-/- astrocytoma cells, which have diminished TGFb activation capacities (Figure 8), express reduced levels VEGF mRNA and protein (Supplemental Figure 4). Collectively, these data suggest that integrin-mediated TGFb activation negatively regulates VEGF gene expression and VEGF receptor signaling pathways during astrocytoma angiogenesis.
A potential role for avb8 integrin as a suppressor of astrocytoma progression
The dramatic reduction in avb8 integrin protein expression that occurs following oncogene-mediated cell transformation also suggests that this integrin may play a suppressive role in tumor growth and/or progression. Although complete genetic ablation of b8 integrin expression does not lead to spontaneous brain tumorigenesis (Mobley et al., 2009), it is possible that other genetic alterations, e. g., activation of oncogenes or loss of a tumor suppressor functions may act in concert with diminished b8 integrin expression to promote spontaneous tumorigenesis. We have shown that genetic ablation of av integrin in epithelial cells of the skin leads to the progressive development of squamous cell carcinoma over several post-natal months (McCarty et al., 2008), suggesting that genetic alterations acting in combination with loss of integrin expression contribute to tumorigenesis. Interestingly, in transformed astroglial cells b8 integrin protein expression is diminished at high passage numbers (Figure 4C), which correlates with a timeline when astrocytes undergo spontaneous loss of the p53 locus (Bogler et al., 1995). We are currently investigating functional links between avb8 integrin with oncogene and suppressor pathways in astrocytomas.
avb8 integrin and human gliomagenesis
In the only other published report for b8 integrin in brain tumorigenesis, Louis and colleagues showed increased expression of b8 integrin mRNA in human GBM samples (Riemenschneider et al., 2005). These analyses centered on integrin expression in primary GBMs, which arise de novo and harbor some genetic alterations that are distinct from secondary GBMs, which are more similar to the mosaic models that we have analyzed in this study. Hence, there may be distinct functions for avb8 integrin in primary versus secondary GBMs, possibly related to different genetic lesions contributing to tumor initiation and progression. Additionally, the non-malignant samples analyzed by Louis and colleagues were from cerebral cortices, and not from the subventricular zone, which harbors neural stem and progenitor cells that likely give rise to GBMs (Alcantara Llaguno et al., 2009; Zheng et al., 2008). It is also possible that sub-populations of GBM cells, e.g., those with stem-like properties that cluster around blood vessels (Bao et al., 2006b; Calabrese et al., 2007), have diminished avb8 integrin expression/function. Any differences in integrin expression in this minority population of cells, however, would not be detected by analyzing bulk tumor masses. We are currently investigating the expression of avb8 integrin in low- and high-grade human astrocytomas to further determine the functions of this integrin in tumor-induced angiogenesis and other malignant processes.

Materials and Methods
Mice and Genotyping
Male NCRnu/nu mice were purchased from Jackson Laboratories and used for all experiments involving intracranial injections of mouse and human astrocytoma cells. b8+/- mice were obtained from the Mutant Mouse Regional Resource Center.
Antibodies, Immunoblotting and Immunofluorescence
The affinity-purified anti-av polyclonal antibody was generated by our laboratory using a synthetic peptide (CKRVRPPQEEQEREQLQPHENGEGTSEA) corresponding to a region of the chicken av cytoplasmic domain. The anti-b8 integrin antibody used for all immunoblotting has been described previously (McCarty et al., 2005; McCarty et al., 2004). The following antibodies were purchased: rabbit anti-b1 integrin, rabbit anti -b5 integrin, rabbit anti-nestin, and rat anti-mouse CD133 (Chemicon), rat anti-mouse CD34 mAb (Genetex), chicken anti-Nestin IgY (Neuromics), rat anti-mouse CD31 and rat anti-mouse av-PE mAbs (BD Biosciences), rabbit anti-b-actin pAb (Sigma), rabbit anti-GFAP pAb (DAKO), rabbit anti-pSmad3 mAb (Epitomics), and anti-Ras and anti-E7 antibodies (Santa Cruz Biotech). Mouse anti-VEGF, rabbit anti-Desmin, as well as rabbit anti-pSmad2 and tSmad2/3 antibodies were purchased from Cell Signaling Technologies. The anti-V5 mAb was purchased form Clontech Laboratories. Secondary antibodies were goat anti-rabbit, goat anti-chicken, goat anti-rat and goat anti-mouse, all conjugated to Alexa488 or Alexa594 (Molecular Probes). For quantitation of blood vessel densities, digital images were captured from sections stained for CD34 immunofluorescence. Mean fluorescence intensity was calculated using ImageJ software. Two investigators, who were blinded to the genotypes for each sample, analyzed fluorescent sections.
Isolation and Propagation of Murine Astroglial Progenitors and Human Astrocytoma Cell Lines
Astroglial progenitors were cultured from cerebral cortices of wild type or b8-/- neonates (P0-P3) and propagated on laminin-coated dishes, as described previously (McCarty et al., 2005). To generate retroviral stocks, 293T Phoenix cells were transfected with pLXSP-puro-E6/E7 and pLXSN-neo-G12VH-Ras (Sonoda et al., 2001b). Primary astroglial cells were transduced with the E6/E7 retroviral supernatant and cells were selected in growth media containing 1 mg/ml puromycin for 5 days. Puromycin-resistant clones were pooled and transduced with G12VH-Ras retrovirus supernatant, and selected after 10 days in G418 (900 mg/ml). To analyze integrin expression in passaged cells, semi-confluent monolayers of cells were trypsinized and split 1:5 onto new dishes. After reaching 80-90% confluence the procedure was repeated. Transformed b8-/- cells were transfected with empty vector (pcDNA4-V5) or vector containing the full-length human b8 integrin cDNA (pcDNA4-b8V5) (McCarty et al., 2005; McCarty et al., 2004). Stable transfectants were selected by growth in Zeocin (300 mg/ml) for 10 days, and integrin overexpression was confirmed by immunoblotting lysates with anti-b8 or anti-V5 antibodies. U87 and LN229 astrocytoma cells were purchased form American Tissue Culture Collection (ATCC) and were propagated in DMEM/F12 supplemented with 10% bovine serum and antibiotics. U251 and SNB19 cells were kindly provided by Drs. Oliver Bogler and Dimpy Koul (both at MDACC), respectively, and were grown in DMEM/F12 supplemented with 10% bovine serum and antibiotics.
Soft Agar Growth Assays
A 1% solution of sterile DNA-grade agarose was mixed with 2X DMEM medium, and the 1X base solution was added to 6-well dishes and solidified. The transformed astrocytes (20,000 cells/ml in 2X media) were mixed with a 0.7% agarose solution, and 5,000 cells were added to the base agarose. The plates were incubated at 37deg C for one to two weeks. Cells were fixed with 4% PFA/PBS and stained with 0.1% crystal violet.
Intracranial Injections of Transformed Astroglial Cells and Human Astrocytoma Cells
Nude mice were anesthetized and a single incision was made from the anterior pole of the skull to the posterior ridge. A hole was drilled over the target brain structure to expose the brain. We targeted the striatum for cell implantation using the following stereotactic coordinates, all relative to the bregma: 1.5 mm rostral, 1.5 mm anterior, and 4 mm below the pial surface. An automated micropump (Stoelting Instruments) was used to dispense cells in 3 to 5 ml PBS over a five-minute period. Astroglial progenitors cultured for less than four passages after transformation were used for the experiments. In the Kaplan-Meier survival study 2.5 x 104 transformed cells were injected, and animals were monitored until development of tumor-induced neurological phenotypes, ranging from weight loss to ataxia. In other experiments, nude mice were stereotactically injected with 1 x 105 wild type or b8-/- transformed cells and tumor-bearing animals were perfused with 4% PFA/PBS. Brains were coronally sliced at 1 mm intervals and paraffin-embedded tissue was serially sectioned at 7 mm intervals. Human intracranial xenograft tumors were generated by injecting 5 x 105 U87 or SNB19 cells into the striatum of immunocompromised mice.
Isolation of CD31+ Intratumoral Cells
Mice harboring 21 day-old intracranial tumors derived from b8-/- (+ vector) or b8-/- (+ b8V5) transformed astroglial progenitors were sacrificed. Tumors were then microdissected from the brain and dissociated into a single cell suspension using neural tissue dissociation media (Rietze and Reynolds, 2006). CD31-expressing cells were sorted using a rat anti-mouse CD31 antibody (BD Biosciences), magnetic beads coated with goat anti-rat secondary antibody (Miltenyi Biotec, Inc.), and a BioMag magnetic separation unit (Polysciences, Inc.)
Luciferase Reporter Assays
Mink lung epithelial cells stably transfected with a PAI1-Luciferase plasmid (Abe et al., 1994) were seeded onto poly-lysine-coated 6-well plates at 4x105 cells per well. Twelve hours later media was removed and serum-free media was added for 24 hours. Conditioned media from wild type and b8-/- transformed astroglial progenitor cells pre-incubated for 12 hours with or without 10 ng/ml LAP-TGFb1 (R&D Systems) was collected and added to MLECs for 12 hours. Cell lysates were then prepared and luciferase substrates were added and quantified using an Enhanced Luciferase Assay Kit (BD Biosciences).
Statistical Analyses
Student's t-test was used to determine statistically significant differences. The Wilcoxan Rank Sum Test was used for analysis of Kaplan-Meier survival results.

Supplementary Material
1
