[Abstract, Methods, Mixed]

Genomic sequencing of meningiomas identifies oncogenic SMO and AKT1 mutations. Meningiomas are the most common primary nervous system tumor. The tumor suppressor NF2 is disrupted in approximately half of meningiomas1 but the complete spectrum of genetic changes remains undefined. We performed whole-genome or whole-exome sequencing on 17 meningiomas and focused sequencing on an additional 48 tumors to identify and validate somatic genetic alterations. Most meningiomas exhibited simple genomes, with fewer mutations, rearrangements, and copy-number alterations than reported in other adult tumors. However, several meningiomas harbored more complex patterns of copy-number changes and rearrangements including one tumor with chromothripsis. We confirmed focal NF2 inactivation in 43% of tumors and found alterations in epigenetic modifiers among an additional 8% of tumors. A subset of meningiomas lacking NF2 alterations harbored recurrent oncogenic mutations in AKT1 (E17K) and SMO (W535L) and exhibited immunohistochemical evidence of activation of their pathways. These mutations were present in therapeutically challenging tumors of the skull base and higher grade. These results begin to define the spectrum of genetic alterations in meningiomas and identify potential therapeutic targets.

ONLINE METHODS
Sample Selection and Preparation
This study was reviewed and approved by the human subjects institutional review boards of the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Brigham and Women's Hospital, and the Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT. Written informed consent was obtained from all participants. We chose to initially perform whole-exome sequencing in 6 meningiomas as a pilot study to determine the optimal depth of whole-genome sequencing needed to provide adequate tumor coverage in spite of stromal contamination. These six tumors and 11 additional whole-genome sequenced meningiomas comprised the discovery cohort. To validate clinically actionable mutations identified in the discovery set, we performed focused sequencing on a validation cohort consisting of an additional 30 grade I meningiomas. We also assembled an extrapolation cohort of 15 grade II and 3 grade III meningiomas (Supplementary Table 1) in order to compare genetic aberrations of low- and high-grade tumors. Our approach of deep, broad sequencing of a small representative cohort followed by validation in an independent larger group is similar to the approach used by others to discover IDH141 and PIK3CA42 mutations. Three study pathologists (SS/DL/ASR) reviewed the histopathologic diagnosis, grade and purity of each tumor.
Representative fresh-frozen blocks with estimated purity of >=90% were selected. DNA was extracted from tissue shavings and buffy coat preparations of paired blood using standard techniques (QIAGEN, Valencia CA) then quantified using PicoGreen(r) dye (InVitrogen, Carlsbad CA). Identities of tumor-normal pairs were confirmed by mass spectrometric genotyping using a well-established 48-SNP panel (Sequenom, San Diego CA)43.
Data, including sequence data and analyses, are available for download via dbGaP (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/projects/gap/cgi-bin/study.cgi?study_id=phs000552.v1.p1).
Sequencing
For whole-genome sequencing (n=11), DNA was randomly fragmented and libraries of two insert sizes were prepared (500 and 800bp) for paired-end sequencing on Illumina HiSeq 200010,11. Target depth (60X-tumor/30X-normal) was achieved in all but one sample (MEN0015) that failed 800bp library preparation; however, adequate coverage of the 500bp library was achieved.
For whole-exome sequencing (n=6), 250bp libraries were prepared by Covaris sonication (Covaris, Woburn MA), followed by double size-selection (Agencourt AMPure XP beads) and ligation to specific barcoded adaptors (Illumina TruSeq) for multiplexed analysis. Exome hybrid capture was performed with NimbleGen SeqCap EZ Exome Library SR v2.2, Agilent Sure Select All Exon v2.0 hybrid capture kit, or both approaches. All samples but one achieved >150X coverage in exon regions (MENex004, 79X-tumor/90X-normal).
We proceeded with sequencing 645 cancer-associated genes in our larger validation and extrapolation sample set (n=48) because this pre-selected gene set (OncoPanel) included all genes of interest that were also clinically actionable (including AKT and SMO) that arose in the discovery set. In addition, a wide breadth of other genes in the same families (such as MTOR in the AKT pathway) and other interesting cancer-related genes in other families were included (Supplementary Table 2). Briefly, DNA was sonicated to achieve an average fragment size of 150bp, then size-selected and barcoded as above. Each multiplexed pool was hybridized with biotinylated baits (Agilent SureSelect, Agilent) designed to capture exonic sequences. Streptavidin-coated beads were used to pull down the complexes, which were loaded on a HiSeq2000 for paired-end sequencing.
Sequencing Analysis Pipeline
For exome- and OncoPanel-sequenced data, pooled sample reads were de-multiplexed using Picard tools (http://picard.sourceforge.net). Read pairs were aligned to the hg19 reference sequence (b37) (ftp://ftp-trace.ncbi.nih.gov/1000genomes/ftp/technical/reference/) using the Burrows-Wheeler Aligner44 (http://bio-bwa.sourceforge.net/bwa.shtml) with options: -q 5 -l 32 -k 2 -o 1. Data were sorted and duplicate-marked using Samtools (http://samtools.sourceforge.net) and Picard. Bias in base quality score assignments due to flowcell, lane, dinucleotide context, and machine cycle were analyzed and recalibrated, and local realignment around insertions/deletions was achieved using the Genome Analysis Toolkit (GATK) (http://www.broadinstitute.org/gatk/)45,46.
Variant and germline calling were performed within the Firehose environment11 using GenePattern47. All algorithms described are available publicly (https://confluence.broadinstitute.org/display/CGATools). All sample pairs passed a QC pipeline to test for any tumor/normal and inter-individual mix-ups by comparing insert-size distribution and copy-number profile as described previously10. The Mann-Whitney test was used to determine significance of differences between rates of somatic genetic alteration between meningiomas and the other datasets.
Somatic copy-number alterations (SCNAs) and rearrangements
SCNAs were evaluated using SegSeq48, which uses a combination of local change-point analysis and subsequent merging of adjacent chromosomal segments with similar copy-number. For arm-level significance analysis, pseudo-markers were added every 10,000 bases to segmented copy-number data, and these were analyzed by GISTIC 2.0 to determine which events occurred more often than expected by chance14.
Rearrangements and their exact breakpoints were identified using the combination of dRanger and BreakPointer algorithms8,10. Briefly, dRanger identifies potential rearrangements from read pairs mapping to different chromosomes or unexpected positions / orientations on the same chromosome, and BreakPointer locates reads spanning the fusion and maps the exact breakpoint using modified Smith-Waterman alignment10. Rearrangements are assigned a score reflecting the number of tumor reads supporting a breakpoint, the fraction of nearby reads with MAPQ0, the prevalence of other nearby discordant pairs, and the standard deviation of breakpoint starting positions. To minimize false-positive rearrangements, only breakpoints with score >=8 passing BreakPointer were accepted. The specificity of this type of approach has previously been shown to be >90%10. Copy-number and rearrangement results were displayed using the Circos program (http://mkweb.bcgsc.ca/circos)49.
Identification of base pair substitutions and short insertion-deletions
Mutations were only considered at covered positions (>=8X-normal and 14X-tumor sites). Somatic mutations and short insertions/deletions were called and post-filtered using MuTect and IndelLocator10,11. These were annotated to genes and compared to events in the Catalogue of Somatic Mutations in Cancer (COSMIC) using Oncotator, and spurious calls caused by mis-mapping and other previously identified systematic errors were removed using an established list of known problematic sites11-13. MutSig was used to determine the significance of mutated genes, adjusting for cohort- and genome-wide mutation rate, local background mutation rate, and gene length11-13. We used a cohort-wide background mutation rate instead of the more commonly used sample-specific mutation rate because the observed low mutation rate in these tumors leads to poor sampling of individual mutation subcategories. This may lead to overly large apparent variations between background rates of mutation subtypes in different samples. Mutations are shown in the context of UniProt regions and domains (www.uniprot.org). Post-hoc analyses for significant non-overlap of NF2, SMO, and AKT1 mutations were determined by Fisher's exact test, as were associations between these mutations and chr22 loss or specific categorical demographic characteristics. The Mann-Whitney test was used for comparisons of mutations and continuous demographic variables.
Germline variants were called using UnifiedGenotyper45,46, filtered against the 1000genomes dataset50, and annotated to genes as above. Genes with known syndromic associations to meningiomas (NF1, NF2, SMARCB1 and PTCH1) were manually reviewed for germline non-synonymous mutations. These were visualized in Integrative Genomics Viewer (www.broadinstitute.org/igv/).
Sequenom Validation
We obtained IRB approval for collection of independent archival paraffin-embedded meningioma samples from the Brigham and Women's Hospital Pathology Department. We identified 95 samples from patients that did not overlap with our cohort of 65 tumors, resected between 2005 and 2012. Forty-nine of these were higher-grade meningiomas. Tissue was de-paraffinized and DNA extracted using standard techniques (QIAGEN, Valencia CA). Variants in SMO (W535L and L412F) and AKT1 (E17K) were assayed using Sequenom's homogeneous Mass-Extend (hME) Genotyping system (Sequenom, Inc. San Diego, CA). Bidirectional probes and primers were designed using Sequenom MassARRAY Typer software (v 4.0), and hME genotyping was performed using 5ng of unamplified genomic DNA template per assay pool (maximum of 4 assays per pool).
Immunohistochemistry
Tissue sections were deparaffinized and rehydrated using Xylene and graded alcohols. Endogenous peroxidase activity was blocked with 3% H2O2 in 100% ethanol (1:1; 15 minutes). Antigen retrieval was performed with Dako Target Retrieval Solution, pH 6.0 and pressure cooker treatment (120+/-2degC, 15+/-5 psi) for 45 seconds. Sections were incubated with primary antibodies against GAB1 (Abcam ab27439, 1:100x45min), Ki67 (Vector Lab VP-451, 1:2500x45min), or Stathmin (Cell Signaling Technologies #3352, 1:120, 4degCx16hr), followed by secondary antibody (Dako Labeled Polymer-HRP anti-rabbit IgG x30min). Visualization was with 3,3'-diaminobenzidine as a chromogen (Envision+System) and Gill hematoxylin counterstaining. Associations between specific mutations and their differences in histopathological subtypes and immunohistochemical staining were determined post-hoc with Fisher's exact test.

Supplementary Material
1
2
3
4
5
