[Abstract, Introduction, Results, Discussion, Methods, Mixed]

TMEFF2 Is a PDGF-AA Binding Protein with Methylation-Associated Gene
                    Silencing in Multiple Cancer Types Including Glioma. Background TMEFF2 is a protein containing a single EGF-like domain and two                         follistatin-like modules. The biological function of TMEFF2 remains unclear                         with conflicting reports suggesting both a positive and a negative                         association between TMEFF2 expression and human cancers.   Methodology/Principal Findings Here we report that the extracellular domain of TMEFF2 interacts with                         PDGF-AA. This interaction requires the amino terminal region of the                         extracellular domain containing the follistatin modules and cannot be                         mediated by the EGF-like domain alone. Furthermore, the extracellular domain                         of TMEFF2 interferes with PDGF-AA-stimulated fibroblast proliferation                         in a dose-dependent manner. TMEFF2 expression is downregulated in                         human brain cancers and is negatively correlated with PDGF-AA expression.                         Suppressed expression of TMEFF2 is associated with its hypermethylation in                         several human tumor types, including glioblastoma and cancers of ovarian,                         rectal, colon and lung origins. Analysis of glioma subtypes indicates that                         TMEFF2 hypermethylation and decreased expression are associated with a                         subset of non-Proneural gliomas that do not display CpG island methylator                         phentoype.   Conclusions/Significance These data provide the first evidence that TMEFF2 can function to regulate                         PDGF signaling and that it is hypermethylated and downregulated in glioma                         and several other cancers, thereby suggesting an important role for this                         protein in the etiology of human cancers.

Introduction
TMEFF2, also known as tomoregulin [1], TPEF [2], HPP1 [3] and TENB2 [4], encodes a transmembrane
                protein that contains a single epidermal growth factor (EGF)-like domain and two
                follistatin-like modules [1], [4]-[6]. The biological function of TMEFF2 remains elusive with
                conflicting reports from different groups. Soluble forms of TMEFF2 extracellular
                domain have been reported to weakly stimulate erbB-4/HER4 tyrosine phosphorylation
                in MKN 28 gastric cancer cells [1], and promote survival of mesencephalic dopaminergic
                neurons in primary culture [6]. As evidence for its positive role in cell proliferation,
                elevated TMEFF2 expression has been associated with higher prostate cancer grade and
                hormone independence by several groups [4], [7], [8]. In contrast, others have
                reported down-regulation of TMEFF2 in androgen-independent prostate cancer
                xenografts, as well as growth inhibition induced by ectopic expression of TMEFF2 in
                androgen-independent prostate cancer cell lines [5]. Moreover, the 5'-region of
                TMEFF2 gene is frequently hypermethylated in some cancers [2], [3], [9]-[16], suggesting a possible tumor
                suppressor role of TMEFF2 in these cancers.
Platelet-derived growth factors (PDGFs) not only play important roles in
                developmental and physiological processes, but also are directly implicated in human
                cancer and other proliferative disorders (reviewed in [17] and [18]). The human genome contains four
                PDGF ligands, PDGF-A, B, C and D, and two receptors, PDGFRa and PDGFRb All
                PDGFs can form functional disulfide-linked homodimers, while only PDGF-A and B have
                been shown to form functional heterodimers. PDGFRs also function as homo- and
                hetero-dimers that differ in their affinities to different PDGF dimers (reviewed in
                    [17] and [18]). The a
                subunit of PDGFR has been shown to bind the PDGF-A, B and C chains, whereas the
                b subunit is believed to bind only the B and D chains. The biological responses
                induced by the different PDGF ligands depend on the relative numbers of the receptor
                subunits on a given cell type and the specific PDGF dimers present.
Follistatin module-containing proteins have been previously shown to be able to bind
                and modulate the function of a variety of growth factors including members of the
                transforming growth factor beta (TGF-b family, PDGFs, and vascular endothelial
                growth factor (VEGF) [19]-[24]. To date, however, no binding partner has been reported
                for TMEFF2. In this report, we have identified PDGF-AA as a growth factor that
                interacts with TMEFF2. Moreover, we show that the extracellular domain of TMEFF2
                interferes with PDGF-AA-stimulated fibroblast proliferation in a
                dose-dependent manner. Our data provide the first evidence that TMEFF2 can
                function to regulate PDGF signaling, and give new mechanistic insights into the
                seemingly conflicting roles of TMEFF2 in human cancers. In addition, we show for the
                first time that the expression of TMEFF2 is downregulated in glioma and several
                other cancers and that this downregulation correlates with DNA methylation. Together
                these data suggest an important role of TMEFF2 in the development and progression of
                human cancers.

Results
The extracellular domain of TMEFF2 interacts with PDGF-AA
TMEFF2 is predicted to contain a transmembrane (TM) domain with an amino terminal
                    (NT) signal peptide sequence (SP) (Fig. 1A). Recombinant proteins containing the extracellular domain
                    (ECD) of TMEFF2 fused to a FLAG tag (TECD-FLAG) or the Fc portion of the human
                    immunoglobulin gamma (hFcg (TECD-Fc) at the carboxy-terminus (CT) were
                    expressed in mammalian cells and purified from cell culture supernatants (Fig. 1B). The purified
                    TECD-FLAG and TECD-Fc ran at the predicted ~55 kDa and ~70 kDa on SDS
                    PAGE under reducing conditions, respectively (Fig. 1c). NT sequencing of the purified
                    proteins revealed that the signal peptide was cleaved between residues 40 and 41
                    in both recombinant proteins (Fig.
                        1D).
10.1371/journal.pone.0018608.g001
Figure 1
Expression and purification of recombinant ECD of TMEFF2.
(A) Hydropathy plot of TMEFF2 protein based on the algorithm
                            of Kyte and Doolittle [53] and the predicted domain structure based on
                            NT sequencing of the recombinant TECD in this study and Horie et al.,
                            2000 [6]. SP, signal peptide; FS I, follistatin-like
                            domain I; FS II, follistatin-like domain II; EGF, epidermal growth
                            factor-like domain; TM, transmembrane domain; N-Gly, potential sites for
                            N-linked glycosylation; GAG, potential site of glycosaminoglycan
                            attachment. (B) Schematic representation of the recombinant
                            TECD-FLAG and TECD-Fc fusion proteins aligned with the full length
                            TMEFF2 (TMEFF2-FL). (C) Purified TECD-FLAG and TECD-Fc were
                            analyzed by SDS-PAGE under reducing conditions with Coomassie blue
                            staining. (D) NT sequencing of the purified TECD-FLAG and
                            TECD-Fc revealed the cleavage site of the signal peptide. The amino acid
                            sequence identified by NT sequencing is underlined. Arrowhead indicates
                            the signal peptide cleavage site.
Since follistatin (FS) module-containing proteins have been shown to interact
                    with PDGF ligands [19], we examined the ability of each of the 3 dimeric
                    forms of PDGF ligands, PDGF-AA, BB and AB, to interact with the ECD of TMEFF2
                    using Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assays (ELISA). Using a biotinylated
                    anti-PDGF-A antibody, we observed a dose-dependent binding when 1 to 10 ng/ml of
                    PDGF-AA was added to the immobilized TECD-FLAG. A weak binding was detected
                    using PDGF-BB and a biotinylated anti-PDGF-B antibody, whereas no significant
                    binding was detected for PDGF-AB using the biotinylated anti-PDGF-A antibody
                        (Fig. 2A). While there
                    was only a slight background binding between PDGF-AA and the uncoated plastic
                    wells, the binding of PDGF-AA to immobilized TECD-FLAG was comparable to its
                    binding to an immobilized anti-PDGF antibody under the same conditions (Fig. 2A). No specific binding
                    was detected for a variety of other proteins examined, including the EGF
                    Receptor family members (EGFR, HER2, HER3 or HER4) and the tumor necrosis factor
                    receptor (TNFR) fused to hFcg. In addition, no significant binding was
                    detected between the TMEFF2 ECDs themselves when TECD-Fc was used as an analyte.
                    As a positive control, an anti-FLAG monoclonal antibody showed dose-dependent
                    binding to the TECD-FLAG coated wells Fig. 2B).
10.1371/journal.pone.0018608.g002
Figure 2
Binding of PDGF ligands and other recombinant proteins to immobilized
                            TECD-FLAG (A,B) and binding of TECD-Fc to immobilized PDGF ligands
                            (C,D).
(A) Binding of dimeric PDGF ligands to TECD-FLAG coated
                            wells. PDGF-AA, AB or BB were applied to TECD-FLAG coated wells (solid
                            symbols) or blank wells (open symbols) and detected with biotinylated
                            anti-PDGF-A (for PDGF-AA & AB) or PDGF-B (for PDGF-BB) antibodies
                            followed by streptavidin-HRP. Anti-PDGF pAb coated wells were used as a
                            positive control for PDGF-AA binding (x). (B) Binding of
                            six recombinant Fc-tagged ECDs and an anti-FLAG mAb to TECD-FLAG coated
                            wells. HRP-conjugated anti-mouse and anti-human Fcg were used to
                            detect anti-FLAG mAb and Fc-tagged proteins, respectively.
                                (C) TECD-Fc was applied to wells coated with PDGF-AA,
                            AB or BB and detected with HRP-conjugated anti-human Fcg.
                                (D) TECD-Fc and other Fc-tagged ECD of various
                            transmembrane proteins were applied to PDGF-AA coated wells and detected
                            with HRP-conjugated anti-human Fcg. TNFR, tumor necrosis factor
                            receptor; PDGFRb, PDGF receptor b; mOX40, murine OX40. Error
                            bars represent standard deviations between duplicates. Representative
                            graphs of at least three independent experiments are shown.
To confirm that the binding observed is indeed due to the interaction between
                    PDGF-AA and TMEFF2-ECD, we then immobilized the PDGF ligands on the plates, and
                    applied the TMEFF2-ECD fused to a different tag, TECD-Fc, as an analyte.
                    Consistent with the results obtained with immobilized TECD-FLAG, TECD-Fc
                    exhibited significant dose-dependent binding only to immobilized PDGF-AA, but
                    not AB, BB, CC or DD (Fig.
                        2C; supplemental Fig. S1A). Similar results were obtained
                    using the label free ForteBio platform (Menlo Park, CA) to measure PDGF binding
                    to biotinylated TMEFF2-FLAG immobilized on the streptavidin-coated sensor.
                    PDGF-AA showed the strongest binding to TMEFF2 while PDGF-BB, AB, CC, and DD
                    showed greatly reduced affinities (data not shown). A recombinant soluble PDGF
                    receptor a extracellular domain (sRa), on the other hand, showed
                    dose-dependent binding to all 3 immobilized PDGF dimers AA, AB and BB
                    (supplemental Fig. S1B), whereas the PDGF receptor bECD-Fc (PDGFRb-Fc)
                    fusion protein was not able to bind PDGF-AA (Fig. 2D), consistent with the reported
                    specificity of these receptors [25]-[27].
TMEFF2 interacts with PDGF-AA through its FS module-containing region when
                    expressed on the surface of mammalian cells
To determine if the ECD of TMEFF2 can interact with PDGF-AA when expressed on the
                    surface of mammalian cells, we transfected 293 cells with constructs containing
                    the full-length TMEFF2 (TMEFF2-FL), or a truncated TMEFF2 without the
                    intracellular domain (TMEFF2-DICD) (Fig. 3). PDGF-AA or PDGF-AB was then added to
                    the culture media and allowed to bind to the cell surface for 30 minutes.
                    Unbound PDGF ligands were subsequently washed away and cell lysates were
                    subjected to immunoprecipitation with either a polyclonal antibody (pAb)
                    recognizing both PDGF-AA and AB dimers, or a pAb recognizing the ECD of TMEFF2.
                    As shown in Fig. 3 &
                    supplemental Fig. S8, an anti-PDGF-A antibody could detect the denatured PDGF-A
                    monomer in the anti-PDGF immunoprecipitates from cells incubated with either
                    PDGF-AA or PDGF-AB, suggesting that both PDGF dimers bound to the cell surface,
                    either through interactions with specific receptors or extracellular matrix
                    (ECM) proteins. However, PDGF-A was detected in the anti-TMEFF2
                    immunoprecipitates only from cells incubated with PDGF-AA but not from those
                    incubated with PDGF-AB. In addition, PDGF-AA was present in anti-TMEFF2
                    immunoprecipitates from cells expressing either the full-length TMEFF2 or the
                    ICD-truncated TMEFF2. This is consistent with the ELISA result showing that
                    PDGF-AA but not PDGF-AB exhibited dose-dependent binding to the ECD of
                    TMEFF2.
10.1371/journal.pone.0018608.g003
Figure 3
Co-immunoprecipitation of PDGF-AA with full-length or intracellular
                            domain-truncated TMEFF2 expressed on the surface of 293
                            cells.
Multiple bands of TMEFF2-FL and TMEFF2-DICD were detected by the
                            anti-TMEFF2 mAb due to different degrees of glycosylation and
                            proteoglycan attachment [4]. mAb, mouse
                            monoclonal antibody; pAb, rabbit polyclonal antibody; Ig LC, light chain
                            of the Ab used for the immunoprecipitation.
TMEFF2 contains 2 FS modules and an EGF-like domain. To dissect which domains of
                    TMEFF2 are involved in its interaction with PDGF-AA, we made Herpes simplex type
                    1 glycoprotein D (gD)-epitope tagged deletion mutants of TMEFF2 and examined
                    their ability to bind PDGF-AA when expressed on the surface of 293 cells (Fig. 4 & supplemental
                        Fig.
                        S8). As expected, PDGF-AA co-immunoprecipitated with gD-tagged
                    full-length TMEFF2 by an anti-gD monoclonal antibody. However, when gD-tagged
                    TMEFF2 mutants lacking either the NT FS I (gD-TMEFF2-DFS I) or both of the
                    FS modules (gD-TMEFF2-DFS I/II) were immunoprecipitated with the same
                    anti-gD antibody, no PDGF-AA was brought down, although both mutant TMEFF2
                    proteins were brought down in the immunoprecipitates. FACS analysis also
                    confirmed membrane expression of all 3 gD-tagged proteins (Supplemental Fig. S2).
                    This suggests that NT regions containing the FS I domain are required for the
                    PDGF-AA interaction, whereas EGF domain alone is insufficient for this
                    interaction. Consistent with this result, a recombinant His-tagged tandem-array
                    of the EGF domain of TMEFF2 also failed to show specific binding to
                    PDGF-AA-coated plates by ELISA (data not shown).
10.1371/journal.pone.0018608.g004
Figure 4
Interaction of PDGF-AA with gD-tagged deletion mutants of
                            membrane-bound TMEFF2.
Multiple bands of TMEFF2-FL and TMEFF2-DFS I were detected by the
                            anti-TMEFF2 mAb due to different degrees of glycosylation and
                            proteoglycan attachment [4].
TMEFF2 modulates PDGF-stimulated proliferation of NR6 fibroblasts
PDGF ligands are potent mitogens of connective tissue cells, including
                    fibroblasts, smooth muscle cells, chondrocytes, and some endothelial cells [17], [28], [29]. The
                    finding that TMEFF2 interacts with PDGF-AA at ng/ml concentrations of both
                    recombinant TMEFF2 ECD and PDGF-AA prompted us to examine the possibility that
                    TMEFF2 may regulate PDGF-AA signaling. We first asked whether PDGFRa, the
                    only receptor that binds PDGF-AA, could compete with TECD for PDGF-AA binding.
                    As shown in Supplemental Fig. S1C, TECD-Fc binding to the PDGF-AA
                    coated plate was blocked by the soluble extracellular domain of PDGFRa,
                    sRa, in a dose dependent manner, indicating that TMEFF2 ECD and sRa bind
                    to PDGF-AA at overlapping sites.
We next examined the effect of TMEFF2-ECD on PDGF stimulated proliferation. The
                    murine fibroblast cell line NR6 expresses both PDGF receptors a and b
                        [30], and
                    exhibits dose-dependent proliferation in response to PDGF-AA or PDGF-AB as
                    measured by BrdU incorporation (Fig. 5A, C). When 10 ng/ml PDGF-AA was added in the presence of
                    increasing concentrations of Fc-tagged TECD, BrdU incorporation was inhibited in
                    a dose-dependent manner at concentrations between 0.6 and 2,000 ng/ml of TECD-Fc
                        (Fig. 5B). This effect
                    was similar to that of sRa which also inhibited PDGF-AA-induced BrdU
                    incorporation at a similar concentration range, albeit with a slightly higher
                    efficiency. PDGF-AB-induced BrdU incorporation, on the other hand, was not
                    affected by TECD-Fc under the same conditions (Fig. 5D). Interestingly, sRa also had
                    little effect on PDGF-AB-induced proliferation, even though consistent
                    with previous reports [31], PDGF-AB could bind sRawith an affinity similar
                    to PDGF-AA (Supplemental Fig. S1B). This may be due to the ability of
                    PDGF-AB to bind to all 3 PDGFR dimers, aa, ab or bb
                        [26],
                    whereas PDGF-AA can signal only through PDGFR aa dimers.It is possible
                    that PDGF-AB may have a higher affinity for the native PDGF receptor ab
                    dimers than for sRa, or that there may be more abundant PDGF receptor
                    ab dimers and/or PDGF receptor bb dimers on these cells.
10.1371/journal.pone.0018608.g005
Figure 5
TECD-Fc interferes with PDGF-AA-stimulated proliferation of NR6
                            cells.
(A) & (C) Dose-dependent stimulation of
                            BrdU incorporation by PDGF-AA and PDGF-AB in NR6 cells. (B)
                            & (D) Effects of increasing concentrations of TECD-Fc
                            (filled bars) or PDGF sRa (open bars) on 10 ng/ml PDGF-AA
                                (B) or PDGF-AB (D) stimulated BrdU
                            incorporation.
TMEFF2 expression is downregulated in brain cancers and is negatively
                    correlated with PDGF-A expression
The 5'-region of TMEFF2 gene is frequently hypermethylated in some cancers
                        [2], [3], [9]-[16], suggesting
                    a possible tumor suppressor role for TMEFF2 in these cancers. To compare the
                    expression levels of TMEFF2 in human tissues, we analyzed Affymetrix microarray
                    data obtained from GeneLogic, Inc. (Gaithersburg, MD) containing multiple human
                    tumor and normal tissue samples. Highest levels of TMEFF2 expression were found
                    in prostate and brain tissues (Supplemental Fig. S3,
                        S4).
                        In situ hybridization experiments confirmed high levels of
                    TMEFF2 mRNA expression in normal adult and fetal central nervous systems, as
                    well as both malignant and non-malignant prostate tissues (Supplemental Fig. S5).
                    The mean expression level of TMEFF2 is significantly higher in prostate cancer
                    tissues compared to normal prostate tissues (Fig. 6A; Supplemental Fig. S3,
                        S4),
                    consistent with previous reports [7]. In contrast, TMEFF2 exhibits significantly lower mean
                    levels of expression in malignant brain samples, especially in glioblastomas
                    (GBMs), compared to normal brain tissues (Fig. 6B; Supplemental Fig. S3,
                        S4).
                    Most other tissues express TMEFF2 at much lower levels than brain and prostate.
                    Several tissues also show a trend of decreased expression in cancers, such as
                    colorectal, esophagus and stomach, with statistically significant difference in
                    colorectal cancer samples compared to normal colon tissues (Supplemental Fig. S3,
                        S4).
                    These data are consistent with a possible tumor suppressor role of TMEFF2 in
                    these tissues.
10.1371/journal.pone.0018608.g006
Figure 6
TMEFF2 expression is downregulated in glioma.
(A) Affymetrix signal intensity of TMEFF2 expression in
                            prostate cancer vs non-cancerous tissues based on GeneLogic data.
                                (B) Affymetrix signal intensity of TMEFF2 expression in
                            normal brain vs brain cancer tissues based on GeneLogic data. Each open
                            circle in (A) & (B) represents one patient
                            sample. Box-and Whisker plots are also included under the raw data to
                            indicate the mean and the 25th and 75th percentile ranges. The whiskers
                            are drawn at 1.5 times the interquartile range from the box.
                                (C) & (D) Normalized signals of TMEFF2
                                (C) and PDGF-A (D) mRNA expression in
                            Proneural (PN), Proliferative (Prolif), or Mesenchymal (MES) subtypes of
                            36 glioma samples. Mean signals for each subtype are shown as insets.
                            * p<=0.05; **,
                            p<=0.005. (E) TMEFF2 expression is
                            negatively correlated with PDGF-A expression in 133 (76 MD Anderson and
                            57 UCSF) HGG samples (Pearson correlation coefficient
                            r = -0.37). Each axis represents normalized
                            signals of each gene. All expression data were obtained using Affymetrix
                            HG-U133A and HG-U133B GeneChips from probe 223557_s_at for TMEFF2 and
                            205463_s_at for PDGF-A, respectively.
High grade gliomas (HGGs) have been classified into three molecular subtypes
                    based on similarity to defined expression signatures: Proneural (PN),
                    Proliferative (Prolif) and Mesenchymal (MES) [32]. The Proneural subtype
                    expresses genes associated with normal brain and the process of neurogenesis.
                    This subtype has been associated with a better prognosis [32], and has recently been
                    linked to a subset of tumors exhibiting a glioma-CpG island methylator phenotype
                    (G-CIMP) and isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 (IDH1) mutation (see below) [33]. In
                    contrast, the other two subtypes are of poorer prognosis [32], and are characterized by
                    a resemblance to either highly proliferative cell lines or tissues of
                    mesenchymal origin, with gene expression programs indicative of cell
                    proliferation or angiogenesis, respectively. Microarray analysis of TMEFF2 in a
                    set of 36 HGG samples that included 12 prototypical cases of each subclass [32], [34] revealed
                    significantly higher levels of TMEFF2 expression in the PN subclass than the
                    Prolif and MES subclasses (Fig.
                        6C). Interestingly, PDGF-A showed an almost mirror-image, opposite
                    trend with the highest expression in the MES subclass (Fig. 6D). Such a trend was not observed for
                    PDGF-B in these samples (data not shown). Further analysis of microarray data in
                    76 HGG samples from M.D. Anderson Cancer Center (MDA) and 57 HGG samples from
                    University of California San Francisco (UCSF) suggests a negative correlation
                    between TMEFF2 and PDGF-A expression in both sets of samples (Fig. 6E). These data are
                    consistent with the hypothesis that PDGF-AA may be an important growth factor
                    required for the development of non-PN HGGs, and that TMEFF2 expression may be
                    selected against in these HGGs that are dependent on PDGF-AA signaling.
TMEFF2 is hypermethylated in multiple tumor types with its expression
                    negatively correlated with methylation levels
Hypermethylation of the TMEFF2 gene in human cancers has been reported in several
                    tissues including colorectal, gastric and esophageal cancers [2], [3], [9]-[12], [16]. However,
                    these tissues express very low levels of TMEFF2 even in normal samples, making
                    the significance of gene suppression less clear in these tumors. Since the
                    methylation status of TMEFF2 has not been reported in glioma and most other
                    tissues, we analyzed all publicly available data from The Cancer Genome Atlas
                    (TCGA) with results on both Agilent expression and Infinium methylation arrays
                        [35]. Of
                    the seven tumor types where these data are currently available, only
                    glioblastoma, and occasionally ovarian and rectal cancer samples show
                    significant levels of TMEFF2 expression (Fig. 7). All samples with high levels of
                    TMEFF2 expression correspond to low CpG island methylation states, while samples
                    with a methylation beta value of greater than 0.1 have a suppressed expression
                    of TMEFF2, which is especially apparent in GBM samples (t-test p-value
                        4x10-14). TMEFF2 expression is barely detectable in
                    almost all colon adenocarcinoma, rectal adenocarcinoma, lung adenocarcinoma and
                    lung squamous cell carcinoma samples. While the majority of these tumor samples
                    show methylation beta values greater than 0.1, there are insufficient data
                    available to determine whether different thresholds of methylation beta values
                    exist in different tumor types for suppressed TMEFF2 expression, or other
                    mechanisms exist to suppress its expression. Nevertheless, taken together with
                    other published reports of TMEFF2 methylation in other tumor types, these data
                    are consistent with the hypothesis that TMEFF2 is silenced through DNA
                    methylation in a significant proportion of human cancers, including glioma and
                    cancers of ovarian, rectal, colon and lung origins.
10.1371/journal.pone.0018608.g007
Figure 7
Expression vs. methylation status of TMEFF2 in 7 human tumor
                            types.
Methylation levels are plotted on the x-axis by averaging the beta values
                            of the two Infinium probes, cg06856528 and cg18221862, and mRNA
                            expression levels obtained on the Agilent chip are plotted on the
                            y-axis.
Recently, a subset of gliomas with characteristic promoter DNA methylation
                    alterations, referred to as G-CIMP, have been identified in the context of TCGA
                    GBM samples [33]. Interestingly, G-CIMP-positive tumors belong to a
                    subset of Proneural tumors and are closely associated with IDH1 mutation. These
                    tumors have a favorable prognosis within GBMs as a whole and also within the
                    Proneural subset. To understand the relationship between TMEFF2 methylation and
                    the G-CIMP signature, we compared the TMEFF2 methylation status against the set
                    of TCGA GBM samples with available G-CIMP and IDH1 mutation information. Of the
                    TCGA samples analyzed by Noushmehr et al. [33], 88 overlapped with the
                    samples that we analyzed using the publicly available dataset. 76 of these were
                    G-CIMP-negative and 12 were G-CIMP-positive. All 76 G-CIMP-negative samples were
                    negative for the IDH1 mutation, while all 12 G-CIMP-positive samples were
                    positive for the IDH1 mutation. Strikingly, tumors with a greater than 0.1
                    TMEFF2 methylation beta value are found exclusively within the non-G-CIMP and
                    non-IDH1-mutant category (Fig. 8A
                        & B). Thus, TMEFF2 does not belong to the reported G-CIMP loci;
                    in contrast, there is a strong anti-correlation between TMEFF2 hypermethylation
                    and G-CIMP-positive or IDH1 mutation status.
10.1371/journal.pone.0018608.g008
Figure 8
Correlates of TMEFF2 methylation and expression in TCGA glioblastoma
                            samples.
(A) TMEFF2 methylation status vs. G-CIMP status. (B) TMEFF2 methylation
                            status vs. IDH1 mutation status. (C) TMEFF2 methylation status vs. GBM
                            molecular subtypes. (D) PDGF-A expression vs. GBM molecular subtypes.
                            (E) TMEFF2 expression vs. PDGF-A expression [t-test
                                p-value = 6.6x10-13
                            between PDGF-A expression levels in samples with high TMEFF2 (expression
                            value>=10) vs. those with low TMEFF2 (expression
                            value<10)].
That TMEFF2 hypermethylation is not found in the G-CIMP and IDH1-mutant GBM
                    samples is consistent with our observation that higher levels of TMEFF2 are
                    associated with the Proneural HGGs, the subclass that the G-CIMP tumors belong
                    to, while suppressed expression of TMEFF2 is associated with the Proliferative
                    and Mesenchymal subclasses of HGGs (Fig. 6C). Therefore, we further analyzed the relationship between
                    TMEFF2 methylation status and the molecular subtypes of the TCGA GBM samples.
                    Using an unsupervised approach to classify data from TCGA, Verhaak et al.
                    described 4 GBM transcriptomal subtypes, termed Proneural, Neural, Mesenchymal
                    and Classical [36]. As recently reviewed in Huse et al. [37], comparison
                    of classification schemes of Verhaak et al. and Phillips et al. [32] reveals a
                    large degree of agreement in assignment of samples to Proneural and Mesenchymal
                    subtypes, while the other expression subtypes are less well resolved. Therefore,
                    we assigned "Proneural" only to those GBM samples that are
                    classified as Proneural by both Phillips and Verhaak schemes, and
                    "Mesenchymal" only to those classified as Mesenchymal by both
                    schemes ([37];
                    C. Brennan, personal communication). All other samples are designated as
                    "Other". As expected, TMEFF2 methylation beta values>0.1 are
                    almost exclusively observed in a subset of non-Proneural GBM samples, including
                    both Mesenchymal and Other subtypes (Fig. 8C). Thus, TMEFF2 hypermethylation
                    anti-correlates with the Proneural signature in GBMs. Consistent with the
                    observation in HGG samples shown above, Proneural GBMs express the lowest levels
                    of PDGF-A, compared to other GBMs (Fig. 8D). Moreover, a strong anti-correlation also exists between
                    PDGF-A and TMEFF2 expressions in the TCGA GBM samples (Fig. 8E).

Discussion
Follistatin domain-containing proteins have been shown to interact with growth
                factors or their binding partners and modulate their signaling [19], [24], [38]. For example, the follistatin
                domain-containing ECM-associated glycoprotein SPARC/osteonectin was
                reported to interact with PDGF-AB and BB (but not AA) and inhibit the binding of
                these ligands to their cognate receptors on fibroblasts [19]. Here we report for the first
                time that TMEFF2 selectively interacts with PDGF-AA via its follistatin
                domain-containing extracellular regions, and modulates
                PDGF-AA-stimulated proliferation of NR6 fibroblasts. Interestingly, both
                shedding of the extracellular domains of TMEFF2 [39], and a truncated splice variant of
                TMEFF2 encoding a secreted protein without the EGF-like and the transmembrane
                domains [40], have
                been identified in cells, suggesting a possible functional role of the extracellular
                region containing the follistatin domains independent of the intracellular and
                transmembrane regions.
First identified in a search for serum factors that stimulate the proliferation of
                arterial smooth muscle cells [41], PDGFs have been shown to direct a variety of cellular
                responses including proliferation, survival, migration, and the deposition of ECM
                and tissue remodeling factors (reviewed in [17] and [18]). Of the genes encoding the four
                PDGF ligands and their two receptor chains, mouse knockout studies have suggested
                that PDGF-B and PDGFRss are essential for the development of support cells in
                the vasculature, whereas PDGF-A and PDGFRa are more broadly required during
                embryogenesis, with essential roles in central nervous system, neural crest and
                organ development (reviewed in [18]). PDGFs have also been implicated in the etiology of
                human cancers. Both PDGFs and PDGFRs are upregulated in human gliomas and
                astrocytomas, and PDGFRa mRNA expression levels are higher in more advanced
                forms of gliomas than in less malignant glial tumors [42], [43]. Elevated levels of PDGF-A
                and PDGFRa proteins have also been observed in human prostate carcinomas [17], [44], [45]. In human
                gastric cancers, high levels of PDGF-A correlate with high-grade carcinomas and
                reduced patient survival [46]. Pdgfra-activating mutations have also
                been identified in a subset of human gastrointestinal stromal tumors [47].
                Interestingly, we and others have observed highest levels of TMEFF2 expression in
                the central nervous system and the prostate amongst normal human tissues
                (Supplementary Figures S3, S4, S5 and [7]). Conversely, lower levels of
                TMEFF2 are found in multiple cancer tissues, especially in the malignant brain and
                colorectal samples, when compared to normal tissues.
The significance of the previously reported hypermethylation of TMEFF2 gene in human
                cancers including colorectal, gastric and esophageal cancers [2], [3], [9]-[12], [16] is confounded by the low levels
                of TMEFF2 expression in normal tissues of these origins. Here we report
                hypermethylation of TMEFF2 in several additional tumor types, including GBM, where a
                clear down-regulation is observed compared to high levels of TMEFF2 expression in
                normal brain tissues. We show that expression of TMEFF2 negatively correlates with
                its methylation levels in GBM and several other tumor types, further supporting a
                possible tumor suppressor role of TMEFF2 in these tissues. In contrast, the mean
                TMEFF2 mRNA expression is elevated in prostate cancer tissues, especially
                non-metastatic prostate cancer tissues, compared to normal prostates, suggesting a
                possible tissue and cell context-dependent dual function of TMEFF2 in human
                cancers.
We have found that TMEFF2 hypermethylation is associated with non-Proneural subtypes
                of GBMs, in contrast with G-CIMP methylation and IDH1 mutation status, which are
                associated with the Proneural subtype and lower-grade gliomas. These associations
                are consistent with our finding of higher levels of TMEFF2 expression in the
                Proneural subtype. Moreover, we observe an exclusivity relationship between TMEFF2
                hypermethylation and G-CIMP methylation, in that none of our samples show both types
                of methylation patterns. These data suggest that TMEFF2 is preferentially
                hypermethylated and suppressed in a subset of non-Proneural and non-G-CIMP HGGs, and
                that TMEFF2 methylation may be associated with worse prognosis.
We also observed an anti-correlation between TMEFF2 expression and PDGF-A expression
                in the GBM and HGG samples, with lowest levels of PDGF-A expression observed in the
                Proneural subtype compared to other subtypes. Interestingly, despite the high levels
                of TMEFF2 and low levels of PDGF-A expression, PDGFRa amplification appears to
                be associated with the Proneural signature of GBM, which may also display elevated
                PDGF signaling signature through increased PDGF-B protein levels and elevated
                phosphorylation of PDGFRb [36], [48]. In fact, a broad range of human gliomas display altered
                PDGF pathway activity, strongly suggesting that this signaling axis plays central
                roles in the events underlying gliomagenesis [49]. It is possible that TMEFF2
                serves as a tumor suppressor in normal brain by inhibiting signaling via PDGF-AA.
                Hypermethylation and downregulation of TMEFF2 may facilitate tumorigenesis in the
                tumors that express high levels of PDGF-A by releasing this inhibition. This
                mechanism of tumorigenesis can only function when PDGF-AA is present and may select
                for both low TMEFF2 and high PDGF-A expression. Of note, Verhaak et al. reported
                PDGF-A overexpression as one of the gene signatures in the "Classical"
                subtype of GBMs [36]; this subtype also exhibited the highest proportion of
                samples with TMEFF2 hypermethylation in our analysis (Supplemental Fig. S7). In
                contrast, Proneural and other tumors with low PDGF-A expression may utilize or be
                selected for a different mechanism to activate PDGF signaling despite the low levels
                of PDGF-A expression, such as upregulation of PDGF-B [48] or amplification of PDGFR
                    [36], without
                the repression of TMEFF2. It should be noted that PDGFRa can be activated by
                ligands other than PDGF-AA, such as PDGF-BB and PDGF-CC, therefore can signal in the
                absence of PDGF-A.
Our findings not only suggest a connection between the role of TMEFF2 in PDGF
                signaling and the potential tumor suppressor function of TMEFF2, but also provide
                possible explanations for the seemingly conflicting roles of TMEFF2 in human
                cancers. It was previously reported that soluble forms of TMEFF2 extracellular
                domain could weakly stimulate erbB-4/HER4 tyrosine phosphorylation in MKN 28 gastric
                cancer cells [1],
                and promote survival of mesencephalic dopaminergic neurons in primary culture [6]. Although we did
                not detect a direct interaction between the EGF domain of TMEFF2 and HER4, it is
                conceivable that the EGF-like domain might have growth factor-like functions
                opposite to its follistatin domains. Alternatively, the interaction between TMEFF2
                and PDGF-AA may either function to sequester the active PDGF ligand away from its
                receptor, or act as a carrier to concentrate or stabilize the PDGF ligand, depending
                on the local concentrations of these proteins in different cellular contexts.

Materials and Methods
Cell culture and reagents
The HEK 293 (Genentech, [50]) and NR6 cell lines [51] were maintained at 37degC
                    and 5% CO2 in DMEM/Ham's F-12 (1:1) containing
                    10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) and RPMI 1640 containing 10% calf
                    serum, respectively. Recombinant human PDGF-AA, AB, BB, CC and DD, recombinant
                    human PDGF receptor a extracellular domain (PDGF sRa), recombinant human
                    PDGFRb-Fc, goat anti-human PDGF, and biotinylated goat anti-human PDGF-A and
                    PDGF-B antibodies were obtained from R&D Systems (Minneapolis, MN). Rabbit
                    anti-PDGF-A polyclonal antibody was obtained from Santa Cruz Biotechnology
                    (Santa Cruz, CA). Mouse anti-FLAG antibody was obtained from Sigma (St. Louis,
                    MO). Other recombinant proteins and antibodies were generated at Genentech.
Generation of the various deletion and fusion TMEFF2 constructs
The full-length TMEFF2 open reading frame (GenBank Accession No. NM_016192) was
                    cloned into a modified pRK vector containing a CMV promoter. The FLAG-tagged
                    extracellular domain of TMEFF2 (TECD) was cloned into the same vector by PCR
                    amplification using forward primer 5'-
                        CTATCGATCTATCGATATGGTGCTGTGGGAGT-3' and reverse primer
                        5'-GACTCTAGAGTCACTTGTCATCGTCGTCCTTGTAGTCGGCGCGCCACTTTTTTTCACAGTGTT-3'
                    with the FLAG tag (amino acid sequence WRADYKDDDDK) fused in-frame to the CT of
                    the end of the EGF domain. TECD-Fc was generated similarly using the same
                    forward primer and reverse primer 5'-CTGGGCGCGCCACTTTTTTTCACAGTGTT-3' and cloned
                    into the same vector containing the human Fcg sequence which was fused
                    in-frame 3' to the end of the EGF domain. The gD-tagged full-length TMEFF2
                    was cloned into the same vector with a 5' gD tag (amino acid sequence
                    KYALADASLKMADPNRFRGKDLPVLSGR) attached in-frame to the predicted start of the
                    mature protein. gD-TMEFF2-DFS I and TMEFF2-DFS I/II were PRC amplified
                    with the same reverse primer 5'-CGACTCTAGATTAGATTAACCTCGTGGACGCT-3' and
                    either 5'-CTGCTCGAGTGTGATATTTGCCAGTTTGGTG-3' or
                        5'-CTGCTCGAGACACCACATACCTTGTCCGGAAC-3' as
                    forward primer, respectively.
ELISA to measure binding between TMEFF2, PDGF and other proteins
For the TMEFF2 coat format, MaxiSorp 96-well microwell plates (Thermo Scientific
                    Nunc, Roskilde, Denmark) were coated with 1 ug/ml TECD-FLAG (Genentech) in
                    50 mM carbonate buffer, pH 9.6, overnight at 4degC. Plates were washed with
                    PBS, pH 7.4, containing 0.05% polysorbate 20 and blocked with 0.5%
                    bovine serum albumin, 15 parts per million Proclin 300, in phosphate buffered
                    saline (PBS), pH 7.4 for 1 hour at room temperature. Serially diluted PDGF-AA,
                    PDGF-AB, PDGF-BB or Fc-fusion proteins in PBS containing 0.5% BSA,
                    0.05% polysorbate 20, and 15 parts per million Proclin 300 were added to
                    the plates and incubated for 2 hours. Bound PDGF was detected by adding
                    biotinylated goat anti-human PDGF-AA, PDGF-AB or PDGF-BB to the plates and
                    incubating for one hour, followed by adding horseradish peroxidase (HRP)
                    conjugated streptavidin (GE Healthcare, Piscataway, NJ) and incubating for 30
                    min, with a wash step in between. Bound Fc-fusion protein was detected by adding
                    goat anti-human Fc-HRP (Jackson ImmunoResearch, West Grove, PA). After a final
                    wash, the substrate 3,3',5,5'-tetramethyl benzidine (Kirkegaard
                    & Perry Laboratories) was added. The reaction was stopped by adding 1 M
                    phosphoric acid and absorbance was read at 450 nm on a Multiskan Ascent reader
                    (Thermo Scientific, Hudson, NH). The titration curves were fitted using a
                    four-parameter nonlinear regression curve-fitting program (KaleidaGraph, Synergy
                    software, Reading, PA).
For the PDGF coat format, plates were coated with 1 ug/ml PDGF-AA, PDGF-AB,
                    PDGF-BB, PDGF-CC, or PDGF-DD. Serially diluted TECD-Fc (Genentech) or other
                    Fc-fusion proteins were added to the plates. Bound protein was detected using
                    goat anti-human Fc-HRP (Jackson ImmunoResearch, West Grove, PA).
ELISA to measure binding of PDGF receptor a to PDGF
To measure binding of soluble PDGF receptor a to PDGF, recombinant human PDGF
                    receptor a extracellular domain (PDGF sRa) was biotinylated using
                    biotin-X-NHS (Research Organics, Cleveland, OH). Serially diluted biotinylated
                    human recombinant PDGF sRa was added to PDGF-AA, PDGF-AB or PDGF-CC coated
                    wells. Bound receptor was detected using streptavidin-HRP.
To measure blocking of TECD-Fc binding to PDGF-AA by PDGF sRa, serially
                    diluted PDGF sRa was pre-mixed with TECD-Fc (final concentration 70 ng/ml)
                    and added to the PDGF-AA coated plate. Bound TECD-Fc was detected using goat
                    anti-human Fc-HRP.
Immunoprecipitation and Western blot
For binding of PDGF ligands to membrane-bound TMEFF2 proteins, 293 cells were
                    transfected with the various TMEFF2 constructs and changed to fresh growth
                    medium containing 5 ug/ml PDGF-AA or AB 48 hours after transfection. After
                    30 minutes of incubation unbound PDGF ligands were washed away with ice cold PBS
                    and cells were lysed in lysis buffer containing 50 mM Tris pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl,
                    1 mM EDTA, 1% NP-40, protease and phosphatase inhibitors, pre-cleared
                    with protein G sepharose, and immunoprecipitated with anti-TMEFF2, anti-PDGF, or
                    anti-gD antibodies. The immune complexes were dissociated with SDS sample buffer
                    with b-mercaptoethanol and resolved by 4-20% Tris-Glycine SDS
                    PAGE, transferred to nitrocellulose membranes, and detected with the indicated
                    antibodies using enhanced chemiluminescence.
NR6 proliferation assays
The NR6 proliferation assay was carried out using a
                    5-Bromo-2'-deoxy-uridine (BrdU) labeling and detection kit (Roche). The
                    indicated concentrations of PDGF-AA or AB were added to quiescent confluent
                    cultures of NR6 cells in RPMI 1640 supplemented with 1x Serum Replacement
                    1 (Sigma) on 96-well microplates, either alone or after pre-mixing with
                    increasing concentrations of TECD-Fc or sRa for 1 hour at 37degC. After 18
                    hours at 37degC and 5% CO2, BrdU labeling solution was added
                    to each well and the subsequent labeling and detection were carried out
                    following the manufacturer's protocols. BrdU incorporation was measured as
                    absorbance at 405 nm with a reference wavelength at 490 nm.
Microarray analysis
Gene expression profiling and analysis of microarray data were performed as
                    previously reported [32], [52] using probe 223557_s_at for TMEFF2 and 205463_s_at
                    for PDGF-A, respectively. Signal intensity values from Microarray Analysis Suite
                    version 5 were utilized with a scaling factor of 500 for all analysis of
                    microarray data. The raw Affymetrix data for TMEFF2 in the GeneLogic tissues are
                    given in Table
                        S1. The microarray data for HGG samples have been submitted to Gene
                    Expression Omnibus (GEO), and the accession number for the data series is
                    GSE4271 [32]. All data are MIAME compliant.
Methylation and expression analysis of TCGA data
We obtained data from the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) that was publicly available
                    as of July 29, 2010, on both the Illumina Infinium methylation microarray and
                    the Agilent G4502A expression microarray. We correlated samples based on the
                    MAGE tables provided and found dual methylation and expression measurements for
                    86 colon adenocarcinomas, 226 glioblastoma samples, 36 renal papillary cell
                    carcinomas, 21 lung adenocarcinomas, 69 lung squamous cell carcinomas, 535
                    ovarian carcinomas, and 53 rectal adenocarcinomas.
Methylation was measured using the beta value taken from the Level 2 files
                    provided by TCGA. From the TCGA array description files, we identified two CpG
                    site methylation probes for TMEFF2: cg06856528 and cg18221862. These probe
                    sequences are located at (-204 to -155) and (-29 to +20)
                    relative to the translation start codon, within a CpG island described
                    previously [3].
                    We found correlations between the beta values for these probes to be above 0.80
                    for the colon adenocarcinoma, lung adenocarcinoma, and lung squamous cell
                    carcinoma data sets, but 0.73 for gliomas, 0.67 for rectal adenocarcinomas, 0.62
                    for ovarian carcinomas, and 0.25 for renal papillary cell carcinomas
                    (Supplemental Fig. S6A). We used the average of the two beta values as our
                    estimate for methylation levels.
Expression was measured using the antilog of the log2 lowest normalized values
                    from the Level 2 files provided by TCGA. The array description files showed
                    three probes belonging to TMEFF2: A_23_P125382, A_23_P125383, and A_23_P125387.
                    Pairwise correlations among these expression values were 0.94-0.95
                    (Supplemental Fig. S6B). We used the average of these probe values as our estimate
                    for expression levels. The probe A_23_P113701 was used for PDGF-A
                    expression.
TCGA samples having the same identifier as those reported by Noushmehr et al
                        [33]
                    were used for comparison between TMEFF2 methylation levels and their G-CIMP and
                    IDH1 status. The subtype classifications of TCGA GBM samples according to either
                    Phillips et al. or Verhaak et al. have been reported in summary (Huse et al.,
                    2011 [37]) and
                    individual sample classifications were kindly provided by Dr. Cameron Brennan.
                    Tumors classified as "Proneural" or "Mesenchymal" by
                    both signatures are assigned these two subtypes in Figures 8C and 8D, and all other samples are
                    classified as "Other".

Supporting Information
Table S1
Affymetrix signal intensity of TMEFF2 from GeneLogic tissues with probe
                        223557_s_at on HG-U133A and HG-U133B GeneChips.
(XLS)
Click here for additional data file.
Figure S1
TECD-Fc selectively interacts with PDGF-AA. (A) PDGF-AA, but not
                        AB, BB, CC or DD, binds to TECD-Fc. TECD-Fc was applied to wells coated with
                        recombinant human PDGF-AA, AB, BB, CC or DD and detected with HRP-conjugated
                        anti-human Fcg. (B) sRa binds to all three recombinant
                        human PDGFs: AA, AB and BB. Biotinylated recombinant sRa (sRa-bio)
                        was applied to wells coated with recombinant human PDGF-AA, AB or BB and
                        detected with streptavidin-HRP. (C) 70 ng/ml TECD-Fc was mixed
                        with increasing concentrations of sRa and applied to PDGF-AA coated
                        wells. Binding between TECD-Fc and PDGF-AA was detected using goat
                        anti-human Fc-HRP.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
Figure S2
gD-tagged TMEFF2 proteins are expressed on the cell surface as detected by an
                        anti-gD antibody. FACS analysis of 293 cells expressing the gD-tagged
                        full-length TMEFF2 or deletion mutants lacking either FS I or both FS
                        modules using anti-gD mAb (black) and four mAbs (red, green, orange and
                        blue) recognizing the FS I module of TMEFF2. Biotinylated anti-mouse IgG was
                        used as a secondary reagent followed by streptavidin-PE. Filled purple, no
                        primary antibody control.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
Figure S3
Comparative transcript expression profiles of TMEFF2 in human tissues based
                        on GeneLogic data. The mRNA expression patterns for TMEFF2 across thousands
                        of human cancer (red) and normal (green) tissue specimens using probe
                        223557_s_at on chips HG-U133A and B are shown.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
Figure S4
TMEFF2 expression is down-regulated in some cancers. (A)
                        Bar-graphs of mean TMEFF2 mRNA expression levels in indicated tissues based
                        on GeneLogic data. Error bars represent standard errors of the mean.
                            (B) Number of tissues analyzed in each category.
                        [N], Normal tissues; [C], Cancer tissues; [M],
                        metastatic tissues; * p<0.05 and **
                            p<0.005 compared to normal.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
Figure S5
In situ hybridization (ISH) analysis of TMEFF2 mRNA
                        expression in normal adult brain and cerebellum (A), fetal
                        spinal cord and spinal ganglion (B), non-malignant prostate
                            (C) and prostate cancer tissues collected on tissue
                        microarrays (TMA) (D). Upper panels, H & E stains; lower
                        panels, ISH signals (white).
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
Figure S6
(A) Correlations between the beta values of two TCGA array
                        methylation probes for TMEFF2 in the tissues analyzed: colon adenocarcinoma
                        (coad), lung adenocarcinoma (luad), lung squamous cell carcinoma (lusc),
                        glioma (gbm), rectal adenocarcinoma (read), ovarian carcinoma (ov), and
                        renal papillary cell carcinoma (kirp). (B) Pairwise
                        correlations among the three expression probes belonging to TMEFF2.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
Figure S7
TMEFF2 methylation (A) vs. PDGF-A expression (B) in
                        GBM subtypes. Each GBM sample is classified according their classification
                        by both Verhaak and Phillips schemes (denoted as Verhaak scheme:Phillips
                        scheme).
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
Figure S8
(A) Efficiency of anti-TMEFF2 immunoprecipitation of full-length
                        or intracellular domain-truncated TMEFF2 expressed on 293 cells
                        compared to inputs in the whole cell lysates (WCL). (B)
                        Efficiency of PDGF-A co-immunoprecipitation with full-length TMEFF2 with or
                        without a gD tag compared to 5 ng of recombinant PDGF-AB or the amount of
                        surface-bound PDGF-A in the whole cell lysates (WCL).
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
