[Abstract, Methods, Results, Discussion]

Development of robust discriminant equations for assessing subtypes of glioblastoma
biopsies. Background: In the preceding decade, various studies on glioblastoma (Gb) demonstrated that signatures obtained from gene expression microarrays correlate better with survival than with histopathological classification. However, there is not a universal consensus formula to predict patient survival.   Methods: We developed a gene signature using the expression profile of 47 Gbs through an unsupervised procedure and two groups were obtained. Subsequent to a training procedure through leave-one-out cross-validation, we fitted a discriminant (linear discriminant analysis (LDA)) equation using the four most discriminant probesets. This was repeated for two other published signatures and the performance of LDA equations was evaluated on an independent test set, which contained status of IDH1 mutation, EGFR amplification, MGMT methylation and gene VEGF expression, among other clinical and molecular information.   Results: The unsupervised local signature was composed of 69 probesets and clearly defined two Gb groups, which would agree with primary and secondary Gbs. This hypothesis was confirmed by predicting cases from the independent data set using the equations developed by us. The high survival group predicted by equations based on our local and one of the published signatures contained a significantly higher percentage of cases displaying IDH1 mutation and non-amplification of EGFR. In contrast, only the equation based on the published signature showed in the poor survival group a significant high percentage of cases displaying a hypothesised methylation of MGMT gene promoter and overexpression of gene VEGF.   Conclusion: We have produced a robust equation to confidently discriminate Gb subtypes based in the normalised expression level of only four genes.

Materials and methods
Collection, storage and histopathology analysis of prospectively acquired
samples
Collection of biopsies was carried out at different hospitals from the Barcelona
metropolitan area through the European Union-funded eTUMOUR (http://www.etumour.net) and
HealthAgents (Gonzalez-Velez et al,
2007) projects and the Spanish-funded MEDIVO2 project.
A total of 44 biopsies were collected from the Hospital Universitari de Bellvitge
(L'Hospitalet de Llobregat), two biopsies from the Hospital Universitari Germans
Trias i Pujol (Badalona) and one biopsy from the Hospital Sant Joan de Deu
(Esplugues de Llobregat). Among the 47 biopsies included in this study, 46 were Gbs and
1 was gliosarcoma, and their diagnosis was directly obtained from the Histopathology
ward of the participating hospitals (local data set from now on). The full study
protocol was approved by the local Ethics Committees and informed consent was obtained
from all patients.
An aliquot of tumour was snap frozen in liquid nitrogen until RNA isolation. Another
aliquot was fixed in 4% buffered formalin and embedded in paraffin. For routine
histological examination, 4-mm thick sections were stained with haematoxylin
and eosin (H&E). Both, the WHO 2000 and 2007 Nervous System Classification criteria
(Kleihues and Cavenee, 2000; Louis
et al, 2007) were used for diagnosis, since biopsies were
collected from 2004 until 2008.
RNA isolation
Total RNA from frozen biopsies stored in liquid nitrogen was isolated following the
procedure indicated by the manufacturer using the mirVana RNA isolation kit
(Ambion-Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY, USA). RNA was characterised using a
NanoDrop spectrophotometer (NanoDrop Technologies, Wilmington, DE, USA). Absence of
protein contamination was monitored by the 260/280 nm ratio of absorbance,
and samples with a ratio ranging between 1.6 and 2.0 were accepted for further
processing. Integrity of the RNA was assessed by using the capillary electrophoretic
system 2100 Bioanalyzer (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA, USA). Only samples producing a
28S/18S ratio equal or higher than 1.2 or an RNA integrity number (RIN) number equal
or higher than 6 were used for further analysis. This was as agreed in the consensus
protocols for data acquisition in the eTUMOUR project.
Microchips and real-time PCR (RT-PCR)
Labelling and hybridisation onto microchips was performed at the Affymetrix core
facility of the Institut de Recerca de la Vall d'Hebron (Barcelona). Labelling was
performed using the One-Cycle Target Labelling and Control Reagents kit (Affymetrix,
Santa Clara, CA, USA). The starting material for the labelling protocol ranged from 1.5
to 5 mg of total RNA and the resulting labelled cRNAs were hybridised
onto the HG-U133 plus 2.0 GeneChip (Affymetrix). Fluorescence images were obtained by
scanning the microchips with the software provided with the GeneChip Scanner 3000.
We used a two-step procedure for the RT-PCR experiments. One microgram of total
RNA was used for retrotranscription using the iScript cDNA synthesis kit (Bio-Rad,
Hercules, CA, USA). A 1/20 dilution of the obtained cDNA was used for amplification
with the SsoAdvanced SYBR Green supermix on the CFX96 Real-Time System (Bio-Rad). We
analysed the expression of four genes using specific primers designed by us: CHI3L1
(forward-CTGTGGGGATAGTGAGGCAT,
reverse-TAGGATGTTTGGCTCCTTGG), LDHA
(forward-CACAGCTATATCCTGATGCTGG,
reverse-GACTAGGCATGTTCAGTGAAGGAG), LGALS1
(forward-CTAAGAGCTTCGTGCTGAACCTG,
reverse-ATGCACACCTCTGCAACACTTC) and IGFBP3
(forward-AGGGCACTCTGGGAACCTAT and
reverse-CTCTCTGTCCCTCCTACCCC). Five samples per Gb group were
evaluated and triplicates per each sample-gene pair were performed. Fold changes
were computed following a method based on the relative difference between groups
(Livak and Schmittgen, 2001).
Normalisation of data and acquisition of publicly available data sets
All data considered in this work were normalised using the robust multi-array average
(RMA) method, which is available in the affy package from the R software
(Irizarry et al, 2003). We initially used as a
test data set the data made publicly available in the work of Lee
et al (2008) (Lee's data set from now on, GSE13041, Gene
Expression Omnibus;
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gds). We selected for our study those 218 out
of the 267 Gbs available that were hybridised onto either the Affymetrix microchips
HG-U133A (n=191) or HG-U133 plus 2.0 (n=27), since the
probeset annotation of the remaining 49 Gbs (HG-U95 Av2) did not match with the one from
the other types of microchips. We evaluated two signatures: one composed of 377
probesets described in Lee's work (Lee's signature, from now on), and a
second one provided by Colman and collaborators (Colman's signature, from now on).
This signature was derived from 110 cases published in four previous works (Nutt et al, 2003; Freije et
al, 2004; Nigro et al, 2005;
Phillips et al, 2006). Probeset identifiers of
the 38 genes proposed in Colman's work were not provided, since the signature was
mainly evaluated using RT-PCR. For this reason, we used those 36 matching genes in
both HG-U133A and HG-U133 plus 2.0 microarrays, which corresponded to 63 probesets in
both microarray types. For the second part of the study, we used data made publicly
available by Gravendeel et al (2009),
Gravendeel's data set from now on (GSE16011). Among available data sets containing
Gbs, uniquely this one provides a large number of cases (n=73) with
survival and KPS data, as well as status of both IDH1 mutation and
EGFR amplification. We used those 71 Gbs that had survival time and living
status available.
Feature selection for the unsupervised classification
We selected those 100 probesets with the highest coefficient of variation (CV) and at
least 30% of signals higher than 1000, a.u. of fluorescence among Gbs from our
local data set. Probesets from each signature were used as input for a hierarchical
cluster using the default settings of the heatmap_2 function from the Heatplus R package
(R Development Core Team, 2011), but we used the
'Manhattan' distance and the 'Ward' clustering method, as
described in a previous work (Tortosa et al,
2011). In doing so, we obtained a heatmap with probesets grouped in rows and
cases in columns. Those cases that were clustered together in a given branch were
assigned to one group of Gbs. The optimal number of groups of Gbs was determined using
the k-means method by setting the number of clusters to 2, 3, 4 or 5. The reliability of
such clusters was assessed through the computation of the silhouette statistic
from the cluster R package (Hartigan and Wong, 1979). The
closest to 1, the highest the dissimilarity between clusters of cases is (Rousseeuw, 1987). For our unsupervised signature, the expression
difference between groups of Gbs was assessed by computing the q-value for all
probesets in our local data set (Storey and Tibshirani,
2003). We provide a graphical summary of this section in Supplementary File 1A. An overview of this and next sections is
depicted in Figure 1.
Survival analysis
Analyses described in this section were performed using the default settings of the
survival package from the R software (R Development Core
Team, 2011). We fitted a survival curve for each molecular group of Gbs
using the Kaplan-Meier estimate (function survfit). We included in this analysis
either patients for which the date of death was recorded or those patients alive, but
for whom a follow-up time of at least half a year was recorded. The difference between
the fitted Kaplan-Meier curves was assessed using the Mantel-Haenszel test
(function survdiff) (Harrington and Fleming, 1982). A
description of survival data is provided in Supplementary Table
1.
On the other hand, we fitted a Cox's proportional hazards model (function coxph)
using Gravendeel's data set (Supplementary Table
6). Models were fitted using as a factor the Gb group provided by the four
probeset-based equation that detected the highest survival difference on
Gravendeel's data set. However, we also fitted a Cox's proportional hazards
model in Gravendeel's data set for the variables IDH1 and EGFR
status, LOH of chromosomes 1p and 19q, age, gender, administration of chemotherapy and
radiotherapy, surgery type, and KPS. In contrast, we fitted a Cox's proportional
hazards model in Lee's data set for the same variables than before, except KPS and
IDH1 and EGFR status, but we included the Gb group as assigned by
Lee and collaborators, status expression of genes MGMT, VEGF and
EGFR, and complementary administration of temodar (Supplementary Table 6). Therapy-related variables (chemotherapy,
radiotherapy and temodar) in Lee's data set and radiotherapy administered in
Gravendeel's data set only indicated those patients subjected to the therapy. The
rest of the values were missing and we assumed that those missing values corresponded to
patients not subjected to therapy. The significance of each variable was assessed using
Wald's test and the 95% confidence intervals for the hazard ratio were
reported.
Evaluation of the predictive ability of gene signatures on the local data
set
We considered three signatures in this work: (1) our local unsupervised signature, (2)
Lee's signature and (3) Colman's signature, as described above. We tested
the predictive ability of these signatures by performing an LOOCV on our local data set.
We standardised the expression values using the mean and standard deviation of each
probeset, and assigned the group to each sample by performing a hierarchical cluster, as
previously explained. The grouping provided by the hierarchical cluster was considered
as the 'gold-standard' for classification purposes in this and next section.
For each gene signature evaluated, we selected those four probesets with the highest
fold change among differentially expressed genes (P-value<0.05, Wilcoxon
rank-based test after Bonferroni correction) among training samples (all except the
sample left out). At each iteration, these probesets were used to calculate a linear
discriminant analysis (LDA)-based formula using the lda function from the R package MASS
(R Development Core Team, 2011). This function produced
an additive model composed of four variables (four probesets), each one with a
discriminant coefficient. We predicted the group of the case left out from the training
set by using the discriminant scores, which we obtained by multiplying the discriminant
coefficients from the lda function and the standardised expression values of each
probeset. The discriminant threshold used was 0, since this value is the expected
centroid between the two groups by using this approach. We repeated this procedure as
many times as cases were available in the data set. In case there were no probesets
below the Bonferroni threshold, we selected those four probesets that displayed the
highest fold changes. We saved the name of the four probesets selected at each
iteration, so that we could summarise the most discriminant ones. Accuracy, sensitivity
and specificity were computed from test sample results. We provide a graphical summary
of this section in Supplementary File 1B.
Development of a predictive equation
Considering that the predictive ability of each formula was going to be initially
tested on Lee's data set, we standardised the expression values of our local and
Lee's data set using the mean and standard deviation of Lee's data set, as
we previously described (Castells et al, 2010).
We reassigned the group of cases (both local and Lee's data sets) through
hierarchical clustering using the four most relevant probesets from each signature. We
generated a discriminant formula only using our local data set and the four most
frequently selected probesets across the LOOCV, with highest fold change and the lowest
P-value. This equation was used to predict the group of each case from
Lee's data set as described in the previous section. Accuracy, sensitivity and
specificity obtained from Lee's data set were considered as the estimated
predictive ability of each discriminant formula. We provide a graphical summary of this
section in Supplementary File 1C. The discriminant
ability of equations generated was tested using Gravendeel's data set. The
difference between the percentage of cases showing both IDH1 mutation and
non-amplification of EGFR in each Gb subtype was assessed using Pearson's
kh2-test and considered significant for a P-value
under 0.05. Other molecular and clinical variables (LOH of chromosomes 1p and 19q,
therapy, age, gender and KPS) were also evaluated (Supplementary
Figures). Similarly, Lee's data set was used to evaluate the
performance of equations on clinical (collection centre, therapy, age and gender) and
molecular (expression of genes MGMT, VEGF and EGFR, and
molecular cluster) variables available. As for Cox's models, we assumed no therapy
administered for those cases showing missing values in therapy variables (chemotherapy,
radiotherapy and temodar). In Supplementary Figures,
difference between groups for numeric variables (age and KPS) was assessed using a
t-test and considered significant for a P-value under 0.05.

Results
Unsupervised analysis to detect molecular subgroups of Gb
Our unsupervised signature composed of 100 probesets obtained the highest values of the
silhouette statistic when we set the number of k-means clusters to two
(silhouette=0.26). However, not all 100 probesets selected were differentially
expressed between the two potential molecular groups of Gb (Supplementary Table 2). For this reason, we selected those 69 probesets
that were differentially expressed (q-value<0.05) between the molecular
subgroups and repeated the hierarchical cluster, as well as the computation of the
silhouette statistic. These 69 probesets resulted in an increased value of the
silhouette statistic compared with the previous signature regardless the number of
k-means clusters considered, while the optimal one was maintained at two clusters
(silhouette=0.34).
The 69 probesets defined one group (group of low expression (GLE) from now on,
n=14) of samples that displayed on average low expression values
(Figures 2A and B). This means that most cases in GLE
displayed lower expression values than the group of high expression (GHE), but not all
of them (Figure 2A). Interestingly, a small difference in
the average age of patients between groups was found (GLE=51.1+-21.2 years
and GHE=63.0+-9.2 years, P-value=0.078, Wilcoxon rank-based
test; Figure 2B). In contrast, neither our local signature
detected two groups displaying a different survival time
(P-value=0.826), nor did Lee's and Colman's signatures
(P-value=0.729 and 0.461, respectively; Figure
2B).
Moreover, some probesets represent genes that have been related to glioma or Gb
tumourigenesis: proliferative factors or their receptor (EGR1, IGFBP2,
IGFBP3 and VEGFA) (Zhang et al,
2002; Lonn et al, 2008;
Norden et al, 2009; Mittelbronn et al, 2009), collagen isoforms (COL1A1,
COL1A2 and COL3A1) (Kirsch et al,
2000; Rege et al, 2005), proteins
that bind to fatty acids (FABP5 and FABP7) (Mita
et al, 2007; Brun et al,
2009) and transmembrane proteins (CD24 and CD163)
(Senner et al, 1999; Komohara et al, 2008). Additionally, some genes that are
overexpressed in GHE (GBP1, SERPINA3, CD163, TIMP1, CHI3L1, IGFBP2 and
FABP5) were also detected by Tso et al
(2006) overexpressed in primary Gbs compared with low-grade gliomas. Also,
our local signature has 9 genes (11 probesets) in common with Colman's signature
(CHI3L1, COL1A2, FABP5, GRIA2, IGFBP2,
IGFBP3, MAOB, NNMT and TIMP1), among which two of
these were included in the final signature proposed in their work. Six other genes in
our signature correspond to gene isoforms in Colman's signature (ACTA2,
COL1A1, COL3A1, FABP7, SERPINA3 and
VEGFA). Similarly, 14 probesets of our local signature matched with those in
Lee's signature (ACTA2, ADM, ANXA1, COL1A2,
COL3A1, CD163, DCN, IGFBP2, MGP,
NNMT, TIMP1, RCAN1, SERPINA3 and
VEGFA).
Evaluation of the predictive capacity of gene signatures on the local data set
through LOOCV
The optimal number of case clusters was again two, as assessed by silhouette values
(Supplementary Table 3). We obtained the prediction
accuracy, the sensitivity and the specificity of GLE for each gene signature. The best
prediction in our data set (n=47) was produced by our local gene
signature, the second one by Colman's signature and the third one by Lee's
signature (Figure 2B). In fact, our local and Colman's
signatures displayed a high percentage of probesets differentially expressed (below the
Bonferroni threshold) among those selected in the LOOCV (Supplementary Table 4). In contrast, few probesets in Lee's
signature were differentially expressed.
Development of discriminant equations
We selected among probesets used in the LOOCV those four ones from each signature that
fulfilled the criteria explained above. The selected probesets were used to perform a
hierarchical cluster to assign group membership in Lee's data set. We built the
LDA equation for each signature considering two groups, as indicated by the
silhouette statistic, which were called GHE and GLE. In fact, only in
Lee's signature the difference of intensity between means was overlapping and the
least significant (see Figure 2C), but we also set the GHE
to the group with highest average value. The resulting equations are
LocSBE, LeeSBE and ColSBE represent discriminant scores from Local, Lee or
Colman-signature based equation, respectively, and S(x) indicates standardised
values of an x probeset of a given gene, as listed in Supplementary Table 5. A negative DSC corresponds to GLE, while a positive
one to GHE. An example for the computation of discriminant values for each case is
described in Supplementary File 2. Detailed results of
this section are provided in Supplementary Tables
3-5.
As shown in Figure 2C, the significantly higher age of
patients in GHE compared with GLE in Lee's data set, regardless the four
probeset-based signature used, seems to agree with the results for primary Gbs provided
by Tso et al (2006). Indeed, some of the genes
or similar isoforms that compose the four probeset-based signatures (NNMT,
CH13L1, IGFBP3, TIMP3 and COL1A2) were
overexpressed in GHE, as were overexpressed in primary Gbs compared with low-grade
gliomas (Tso et al, 2006). The highest
prediction accuracy for subtype membership was obtained by our LocSBE (83.5%),
while the other ones were far below in performance (61.5% and 68.3% for
LeeSBE and ColSBE signatures, respectively). However, the groups distinguished by LocSBE
did not show a significant survival difference, whereas the LeeSBE and ColSBE did
(Figure 2C and Figures
3A-C). At this point, we hypothesised that a consensus signature
(ConsSBE) that included the 12 probesets from the three four probeset-based signatures
could improve both the prediction accuracy and the detection of a difference in
survival, but such hypothesis failed (Figure 2C).
Prediction ability on an independent data set
We assigned the class group to cases from Gravendeel's data set using Equations 1, 2, 3 and evaluated in each Gb group the percentage of individuals
simultaneously showing IDH1 mutation and non-amplification of EGFR.
Both LocSBE and ColSBE displayed a significantly higher percentage of cases with the
mentioned alterations in the GLE group compared with the GHE one (Figure 3D). As previous work reported that secondary Gbs are characterised
by a higher accumulation of IDH1 mutation (Yan et
al, 2009), the use of LocSBE and ColSBE seems to distinguish these
two subtypes. However, only groups identified by ColSBE displayed a differential
survival (Figure 3G), whereas LocSBE showed a mild
non-significant difference and survival of groups distinguished by LeeSBE was almost
identical.
We evaluated the ability of ColSBE as a survival predictor by fitting a proportional
hazards Cox's model (Table 1). We confirmed that those
individuals from GHE have almost three times (or 277%) higher probability of
death (hazard ratio) than those ones from GLE using Gravendeel's data set, while
higher than two using Lee's data set. Similarly, the hazard ratio increased almost
three times (or 275%) for those patients not displaying IDH1 mutation
and almost halved (down to 55.8%) for those ones showing EGFR
amplification. Patients simultaneously harbouring IDH1 mutation and
EGFR non-amplification further reduced the probability of death down to a
25.5%. In front of this result, we tested whether those patients simultaneously
harbouring IDH1 mutation, non-amplification of EGFR and classified as
GLE by ColSBE displayed a lower probability of death than the rest of patients. This
resulted into a decrease down to 16.1% of the death hazard ratio, or inversely,
more than six-fold increase of the death hazard ratio for those patients not showing the
above-mentioned pattern for these three features. Cox's models on Lee's data
set showed that non-proneural cases have an 84.1% higher probability of death
than proneural ones. Also, the increase of one KPS unit and radiotherapy administration
resulted into a decrease in the hazard ratio down to 95.1% and 50.1%,
respectively. On the contrary, each additional year of patient's life provokes a
2.3% increase of probability of death in Gravendeel's data set and almost
the same percentage (2.5%) in Lee's data set. None of the rest of variables
was a significant predictor of survival.
On the other hand, considering that probesets composing ColSBE may have a potential
diagnostic use, we validated their expression in our local data set samples by
RT-PCR. As we shown in Table 2, fold changes between
GLE and GHE were coherent with the ones obtained using microarray data.
Composition of Gb groups
A complementary study of Cox's models was performed by analysing the composition
of GHE and GLE in terms of available variables in Lee's and Gravendeel's
data sets. We evaluated the percentage of cases from each profile (proneural,
proliferative, mixed proliferative-mesenchymal -promes- and mesenchymal) within GHE and
GLE. As we shown in Supplementary Figure 1, a
significant difference between GHE and GLE is observed, regardless of the equation used
to classify cases. However, almost all GLE cases (10 out of 11) belonged to the
proneural profile when using ColSBE, while all profiles were represented using LocSBE
and only proliferative and promes using LeeSBE. This feature and the increased number of
cases with low expression of gene MGMT and VEGF (Supplementary Figure 2) further corroborates that cases classified as GLE
by ColSBE are expected to develop a less malignant cancer. In this sense, most patients
previously untreated or non-complementarily treated with temodar were classified as GLE
(Supplementary Figure 3) by LeeSBE and ColSBE, but
this difference was not significant. Gender did not appear to display a different
representation between GHE and GLE, but a significant decrease of patient's age
was observed in GLE cases regardless the equation used (Supplementary Figure 4). The validity of results based on ColSBE is also
assessed by the statistically equal distribution of collection centres in GHE and GLE,
which is not observed using the LocSBE and LeeSBE (Supplementary
Figure 1).
Gravendeel's data set allowed assessing the relevance of loss of heterozygosis of
chromosomes 1p and 19q, but not significant difference was observed (Supplementary Figure 5). Inversely, the separated analysis of
IDH1 status and EGFR amplification provided an equivalent result
than considering simultaneous alterations (Figure 3 and
Supplementary Figure 5). Type of surgical resection,
radiotherapy and chemotherapy administered did not display a significant percentage
difference between GHE and GLE, except the high percentage of patients subjected to
chemotherapy in GLE when using the LocSBE (Supplementary Figure
6). The average age of patients was lower in GLE only when the
classification was based on ColSBE (Supplementary Figure
7), which confirms the result observed using Lee's data set.
Nevertheless, neither gender, nor KPS appeared to be a differential feature between GHE
and GLE.

Discussion
Extensive previous work has tried to uncover a molecular signature, which can be used to
improve diagnosis and prognosis of high-grade gliomas and/or specifically Gbs.
However, there is no widely accepted and validated consensus equation yet to carry out
this discrimination for Gbs. For this reason, we followed a step-wise approach in this
work to generate discriminant equations. Our local signature splits cases in two groups
(GHE and GLE), which agrees with the number of Gb groups found in Lee's and
Colman's works. Among genes overexpressed found by Tso and collaborators in primary
Gbs compared with low-grade gliomas, only EGFR and SEC61G were not
overexpressed in our GHE compared with GLE group. In fact, the lack of overexpression of
EGFR and SEC61G in GHE could imply that these two genes are a
characteristic feature of Gbs in general, but not a differential feature of primary Gbs.
In this sense, the high expression of ADM and FCGBP also shows that
these genes could also be characteristic of primary Gbs, although Tso and collaborators
found overexpression for both Gb subtypes.
Furthermore, the average age of patients in the GLE group was lower than in GHE when
evaluated on Lee's data set. Both molecular features and age of patients in each
group seem to agree with the results published by Tso et al
(2006), which described these features for primary and secondary Gbs. Thus, we
may hypothesise that GHE and GLE detected using our local signature could correspond to
primary and secondary Gbs, respectively. Such hypothesis was confirmed when we applied the
equations generated on the fully independent data set made available by Gravendeel and
collaborators. The GLE assigned by LocSBE and ColSBE displayed a significant higher
percentage of Gbs harbouring both IDH1 mutation and non-amplification of
EGFR than GHE. However, only ColSBE was able to distinguish two groups
displaying a significant survival difference.
In fact, the percentage of cases showing IDH1 mutation in primary Gbs described
by Yan and collaborators (6%) was similar to the percentage of GHE cases detected
by ColSBE in Gravendeel's data set, which displayed both IDH1 mutation and
non-amplification of EGFR (6.5%). This value is also similar to the
percentage of primary Gbs showing IDH1 mutation, as described by Lai and
collaborators. Thus, these features would agree with what had already been described for
primary Gbs (Yan et al, 2009; Lai et al, 2011). Moreover, the percentage of cases showing such
alteration in GLE cases (44.4%) approached the percentage of proneural cases with
IDH1 mutated (30%), as described by Verhaak et
al (2010). Considering that only proneural and neural cases showed
IDH1 mutation in their work and that GLE based on ColSBE showed a predominant
percentage of proneural cases, GLE-classified cases are expected to display a better
prognosis than GHE ones. This hypothesis is also confirmed by the significant higher
percentage of GLE cases showing low expression of genes MGMT and VEGF,
although the expression status of these genes did not imply a significant improvement of
survival (Table 1).
In addition, ColSBE-based classification and IDH1/EGFR status are
predictors of survival as revealed by Cox models, but stratification of patients by
combining ColSBE and IDH1/EGFR status was translated into the strongest
decrease of death hazard ratio among variables analysed. This result indicates that these
three molecular features do not exclude each other, but provide a refined prediction of
patient's survival. In this sense, our and previous work's results suggest
that an effort should be done to establish a 'gold-standard' to classify newly
acquired Gb biopsy cases. Our proposed discriminant equation, together with
IDH1/EGFR status, provides a link between classical 'primary'
and 'secondary' accumulated clinical information and an objective molecular
discrimination of those clinical entities.
Conversely, the high prediction accuracies obtained through LOOCV suggest that in small
data sets, class prediction may be fairly optimal, regardless of the signature used.
Nevertheless, the prediction of Lee's cases through a four probeset-based LDA
equation revealed a much higher prediction accuracy of our LocSBE (83.5%), as
compared with the other ones (61.5 and 68.3%). Comparing these results with the
ones obtained from survival analysis, it seems evident that our feature selection method
tends to select probesets more able to predict the class group of test cases, rather than
detecting differential survival between Gb groups. This can be due to our feature
selection strategy that did not consider probesets highly correlated with survival, which
is a similar strategy to the one used by Li et al
(2009). In contrast, signatures obtained in Lee's and Colman's
works considered such correlation.
Then, our study proposes a strategy towards the establishment of a
'gold-standard' for Gb subtyping. To our knowledge, there is not a single
equation available in the literature to directly predict survival or subtype of Gb cases.
Then, we have herewith produced formulas (Equation 1, 2, 3) for each gene signature and fully
documented the postprocessing protocol for anyone to be able to test their performance.
Colman signature-based equation appears to confidently distinguish Gbs with expected high
survival and it may differentiate the subtype of Gbs better than the clinical history
alone. That is, the classification of primary and secondary Gbs only based in the
recurrence of the glioma may be misleading, because early clinical signs or symptoms may
have been bypassed. This would artefactually increase the primary Gb group based in
clinical history alone. Considering that confident identification of primary/secondary
Gb would have a diagnostic interest, but there is no confident method for such a purpose
(Ohgaki and Kleihues, 2007; Louis
et al, 2007), we propose ColSBE as a diagnostic tool to be tested
in the day-to-day work at the (molecular) histopathology laboratory, which used conjointly
with evaluation of IDH1/EGFR status may improve prediction of patient's
survival. The validation of expression values from ColSBE through RT-PCR
demonstrates the potential diagnostic use of such equation, although we recognise that
further work is necessary to fit an LDA equation solely based on RT-PCR values.
