[Abstract, Results, Discussion, Methods, Mixed]

Mn3[Co(CN)6]2@SiO2 Core-shell Nanocubes: Novel bimodal contrast agents for MRI and optical imaging. Nanoprobes with dual modal imaging of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and two-photon fluorescence (TPF) can serve as promising platforms for clinical diagnosis. A wide range of molecules and nanoparticles have been investigated as agents for contrast enhanced MRI and fluorescence imaging in cancer diagnosis. However, a single material with dual modal imaging of MRI and TPF is rarely reported. We found that Mn3[Co(CN)6]2 nanocubes can serve as agents for both T1- and T2-weighted MRI, and TPF imaging. The nanocubes coated with silica to form Mn3[Co(CN)6]2@SiO2 core-shell nanocubes were readily internalized by cells without showing cytotoxicity. In vitro tests, the core-shell nanocubes display relatively high longitudinal (r1) and transverse (r2) relaxivities, they also manifest a remarkable T1 and T2 contrast effects at in-vivo imaging of internal organs in Mice. Moreover, the core-shell nanocubes could offer high-resolution cell fluorescence imaging by two-photon excitation (720 nm) or by conventional fluorescence with 403- or 488-nm excitation.

Results
Mn3[Co(CN)6]2 nanocubes were synthesized at room temperature43 and coated by treating the nanocubes with TEOS under sol-gel conditions (Supporting Information, Scheme 1). Field-effect scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM) images showed that uniform Mn3[Co(CN)6]2 and Mn3[Co(CN)6]2@SiO2 nanocubes with the size around 150-180 nm and 160-200 nm were obtained, respectively (Figure 1). Some cracks (shown by the red arrow in Figure 1b) on the surface appeared along with the increase of pore size after silica coating to form Mn3[Co(CN)6]2@SiO2 nanocubes (Supplementary Table 1). The molar ratio of Mn to Co was measured to be approximately 3:2 (Supplementary Table 2) by inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectrometry (ICP-AES) and was consistent with the X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) phase analysis (Supplementary Fig. 1). The silica coating cannot be detected by XRD due to its amorphous nature with a very weak and broad diffraction band at 20deg, however, the peak at 102.90 eV in X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) spectra corresponds to chemical bonding of Si-O, which confirmed the existence of silica (Supplementary Fig. 2). Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images were applied to substantiate the core-shell format of Mn3[Co(CN)6]2@SiO2 nanocube (Supplementary Fig. 3a, b and inset). Energy Dispersive Spectrometer (EDS) pattern comfirmed the surface element distribution of manganese (Mn), cobalt (Co), silicium (Si) and oxygen (O) in Mn3[Co(CN)6]2@SiO2 nanocube, showing the existence of the silica layer (Supplementary Fig. 3c). Both uncoated and silica-coated Mn3[Co(CN)6]2 nanocubes displayed relatively high surface area and large pore size, measured by nitrogen absorption-desorption isotherms at 77 K (Supplementary Fig. 4). The nanocubes can form stable colloidal suspensions in aqueous media, which can be used days later (Supplementary Fig. 5).
Biocompatibility without cytotoxicity is an important property of materials for biomedical applications. To evaluate the cytotoxicity of the as-prepared nanocubes, 3-(4,5-Dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) assays were carried on HeLa, HepG2, A549 and glioma C6 cell lines. As shown in Figure 2, these cell lines remain highly viable after being incubated for 24 h, indicating that for the tested concentrations there is no cytotoxicity. Although Mn, Co and CN- may be toxic, their toxicity can be significantly reduced when forming coordination compounds such as Mn3[Co (CN)6]2 nanocubes that are composed by stable chemical bonds. What's more, the biotoxicity of silica-coated Mn3[Co(CN)6]2 nanocubes can be further reduced, especially at higher concentrations.
Uncoated and silica-coated Mn3[Co(CN)6]2 nanocubes as DMCAs for MRI have been investigated both in-vitro and in-vivo. The MRI signal intensity of samples was measured by a 3T MRI scanner. Uncoated and silica-coated Mn3[Co(CN)6]2 nanocubes were respectively dispersed in pH 7.4 phosphate buffered solutions (PBS) with different concentration of Mn2+ to determine the longitudinal (r1) and transverse (r2) relaxivities. To quantitatively characterize their magnetic resonance properties, the concentration of Mn2+ was measured by ICP-AES. The in-vitro MR images (Figure 3a, b, c, d) demonstrated the relationship between the concentration of Mn2+ ions and MR imaging performance. On a per mM Mn2+ basis, uncoated and silica-coated Mn3[Co(CN)6]2 nanocubes exhibited r1 of 4.798 mM-1s-1 and 10.52 mM-1s-1 and r2* of 89.5572 mM-1s-1 and 173.09 mM-1s-1, respectively. It is particularly notable that the minimum dosage that can manifest the contrast over water proton is only 2.5 mg/mL for both types of nanocubes, which shows negligible toxicity at this concentration in cytotoxicity test. HeLa cells were also incubated with various concentrations of Mn3[Co(CN)6]2@SiO2 nanocubes for 24 hours (Supplementary Fig. 6) for further MRI tests. The results obtained are in accordance with results from the in vitro MRI tests. It is demonstrated for the first time that Mn3[Co(CN)6]2 nanocubes have the potential to be used as effective T1 & T2 MRI contrast agents.
Effects of Mn3[Co(CN)6]2@SiO2 nanocubes on in-vivo MR imaging were studied in mice with C6 glioma bearing brain tumor with a suspension of 0.5 mL Mn3[Co(CN)6]2@SiO2 nanocubes injected (1.25 mg nanocubes per kilogram of mouse body weight). As the blood brain barrier is destroyed as a result of the tumor formation in this animal model, Mn3[Co(CN)6]2@SiO2 nanocubes enter the tumor readily and are retained there for long periods. Thus, the brain cancer cells were selectively enhanced in T1 MRI because Mn3[Co(CN)6]2@SiO2 nanocubes were injected through tail vein and accumulated at the tumor by strong cytophagy effect of the cancer cells. The localization of nanoparticles in brain tumor tissue was confirmed by ex-vivo ICP measurements, with the concentrations of Mn and Co at approximately 0.19 mg/ml and 0.13 mg/ml, respectively. Based on the images taken from coronal plane (Figure 4), within 30 minutes after injection, obvious T1 contrast effects can be observed at the tumor and remain for 24 hours as the nanocubes accumulating. However, influenced by the bleeding and edema in brain tissue, T2 effect was not clearly detected. Therefore, in order to evaluate T2 contrast in tumor imaging of the nanocubes, a perfusion weighted imaging (PWI) was used (Supplementary Fig. 7). The T2 signal was measured every second after the injection of Mn3[Co (CN)6]2@SiO2 nanocubes through tail vein. The signal decreased sharply 11 s post injection, reached the lowest value at 16 s, then returned back immediately, confirming the T2 relaxation effects of as-prepared nanocubes. When we compared the signal intensity of brain tumors with normal brain tissue, it was observed that the signal amplitude of T2 decreased over time because of the abundant vessel and large blood volume at the tumor. It needs to be emphasized that the nanoparticles appeared unlikely to cause acute or severe toxic effects to cause sudden death in mice during in-vivo experiments. No obvious dose-dependent body weight loss in mice was observed. Mn3[Co(CN)6]2@SiO2 nanocubes demonstrated low acute toxicities, thus, can be used as contrast agents.
In order to further demonstrate Mn3[Co(CN)6]2@SiO2 nanocubes with a high r1 relaxivity, we also investigated in-vivo vessel wall imaging of a mouse. Mn3[Co(CN)6]2@SiO2 nanocubes (1.25 mg nanocubes per kilogram of mouse body weight) were injected into a mouse via the tail vein and measured by MR angiography immediately. Blood vessels were clearly seen on T1-weighted images, displaying outstanding T1 relaxation properties of Mn3[Co(CN)6]2@SiO2 nanocubes as intravascular MRI CAs (Figure 5b). Dynamic changes in signal intensity in the kidney were also clearly observed on T1-weighted imaging after the injection (Figure 5a). By comparing each pair of MRI images before and after Mn3[Co(CN)6]2@SiO2 nanocubes injection, a signal increase is observed on T1-weighted MR images of a mouse kidney 5 minutes post injection, then the image signals remain stable for 30 minutes. These results demonstrate for the first time that Mn3[Co(CN)6]2@SiO2 nanocubes have potential for use as T1 & T2 MRI contrast agents.
The nanocubes were incubated with HeLa cell lines for 24 h without any further dyeing for TPLSM test by confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM). It was observed that uncoated and silica-coated Mn3[Co(CN)6]2 nanocubes were localized in cytoplasm and the fluorescence from unstained cells excited at various wavelengths were caused by the nanocubes themselves (Figure 6). The emission spectrum in the wavelength range 400 to 720 nm (lex = 720 nm, two photons excitation) was measured by two-photon excited fluorescence microscopy (TEFM) (Supplementary Fig. 8). Fluorescence spectra of uncoated and silica-coated Mn3[Co(CN)6]2 nanocubes in the concentration of 250 mg/mL also confirmed that the fluorescence was caused by Mn2+ ion, whose emission peaks were around 550-600 nm. The excitation spectra were determined by varying the excitation wavelength to find the maximum emission intensity at 571 nm (Supplementary Fig. 9a,b). Two peaks at 355 nm and 475 nm detected in the excitation spectrum were assigned with 6A1(6S) - 4E(4D) (350 nm, 3.49 eV) and 6A1(6S) - 4E, 4A1(4G) (475 nm, 2.61 eV) transition of Mn2+, respectively (Supplementary Fig. 9c,d). Thus, the luminecence mechanism of as-prepared CAs can be well explained.

Discussion
MRI is currently one of the most powerful imaging technologies both in biological investigations and medical diagnosis. As a new MRI CA, the r1 value of Mn3[Co(CN)6]2@SiO2 nanocubes is much higher than Mn-based CAs. Even though the relaxivity is not as high as that of Gd3+ with various ligands (higher than 10 mM-1s-1)44, it is higher than the average value of MnO (lower than 1 mM-1s-1)4546. It is interesting to understand why the high r1 value and r2/r1 relaxivity ratio can be generated in the nanocubes. As we know, the interaction dynamics between water and Mn2+ complexes highly affects the relaxivity, while the mechanism remains unclear. Based on Solomon-Bloembergen-Morgan (SBM) theory4748, direct water coordination to the paramagnetic metal centers is the major contributor to T1 inner-sphere relaxivity49. Mn3[Co(CN)6]2 nanocubes have a face-centered cubic structure in which two different ion centers Mn2+ and Co3+ are bridged by CN- groups to form an extended 3D covalent coordination lattice structure39. As a result, there are a large amount of original pores and voids inside the structure confirmed by pore size distribution measurements. The vacant sites in the lattice are usually occupied by water molecules, which are accessible for water motion, therefore, a well-working inner sphere T1 relaxation of the nanocubes and water molecules can be generated. What's more, the Mn2+ ions are positioned in the body centers and edge centers in the face-centered cubic structure, which is free to adjunct with water molecules to form a coordination sphere with each Mn2+ ion surrounded with water molecules, thus, the outer sphere T1 relaxation has also been generated. With the simultaneous action of inner and outer sphere relaxation, Mn3 [Co(CN)6]2 nanocubes manifest an enhanced relaxivity. Moreover, it is suggested that the higher relaxivity of Mn3[Co(CN)6]2 @SiO2 nanocubes is benefited from the silica coating, which allows better water molecules exchange with the metal ions. It has been reported that water molecules diffusing anisotropically inside the silica, with the fastest diffusion component occurring along the channels in the silica, is more rapid than that of the isotropic diffusion in the surrounding environment30. Nanopores in Mn3[Co(CN)6]2@SiO2 nanocubes reveraled by nitrogen absorption isotherms measurement allow water molecules diffusion to the magnetic cores, leading to efficient relaxation of water molecules in the vicinity of the nanoparticles.
Upon biphotonic excitation at 720 nm, both Mn3[Co(CN)6]2 and Mn3[Co(CN)6]2@SiO2 nanocubes displayed outstanding fluorescence in the visible spectrum. This TPF imaging technique provides the possibility of long-term imgaing of cellular process with reduced photodamage compared to UV-exicited imaging48. Recently, it is reported that the photoluminescence of 4T1 - 6A1 transition of Mn2+ can provide efficient two-photon fluorescent in doped QDs, such as Mn-doped ZnS QDs42, which demonstrates the possibility of Mn2+ ions used in TPF imaging. Compared with Au nanodots with the same fluorescent intensity50, the concentrations of uncoated and silica-coated Mn3[Co(CN)6]2 nanocubes are much lower than that of the reported human insulin-Au nanodots for cellular imaging. Thus, all the results above demonstrate that both uncoated and silica-coated Mn3[Co(CN)6]2 nanocubes can be efficiently used as TFP imaging probes. The use of near-infrared-emitting probes could enhance both the tissue depth penetration and imaging sensitivity.
The integration of conventional MRI and TPF probes into a single material such as MOF structured compounds provide a new way to design and synthesis CAs. The advantages of the as-prepared nanoparticles is that they have low toxicity and long circulation time, suggesting their suitability for clinical applications. Most fluorescent probes might be harmful. For instance, Cd-based QDs are used as excellent fluorescent probes, however these nanocrystals have two intrinsic limitations: photooxidation of QDs can cause the release of cadmium and photoexcited QDs can produce reactive oxygen species (ROS). As a result, a doubt has been shed on the future applicability of Cd-containing QDs, particularly in view of environment regulations51. While, in Mn3[Co(CN)6]2 nanocubes, Mn, Co and CN- were composed by strong chemical bonds, which can effectively get rid of the toxicity, resulting in better biocompatibility than some reported CAs52. Furthermore, after coated with SiO2, the toxicity decreases remarkably. Since all the CAs investigated nowadays might aggregate in body to cause some long term toxicity, a single material with low cytotoxicity would be more friendly in bio-applications.
In conclusion, we have prepared efficient CAs, Mn3[Co(CN)6]2 nanocubes, which show dual contrast enhancement of both T1- and T2-weighted MRI and TPLSM fluorescence imaging. This is the first report that an individual material can act as multimodal contrast agents, overcoming major limitations of current multimodal imaging probes prepared by incorporating QDs and magnetic nanoparticles or paramagnetic Gd ions. Surface modification with silica to form Mn3[Co(CN)6]2@SiO2 core-shell nanocubes was achieved, much better biocompatibility was observed in the core-shell nanocubes by cellular cytotoxicity test, making them suitable for biomedical applications.

Methods
In vitro MR imaging
Magnetic Resonance Images (MRI) were acquired by magnetic resonance scanner (GE Signa HDxt 3.0 Tesla MRI system). T1-weighted MR images were taken by using a saturation recovery using spin-echo sequence (TE = 10 ms, TR = 4000, 2000, 1000, 500, 200, 100 ms,respectively). T2*-weighted images were also obtained by Carr-Purcell-Meiboom-Gill method with the RARE sequence using the parameter of TR = 120, TE = 2.328, 6.112, 9.896, 13.68, 17.46, 21.24 ms, the filp angle = 30deg, bandwidth = 31.25 Hz, FOV 180 x 180 mm2, slice thickness = 3 mm without gap.
In vivo MR imaging
Sprague-Dawley (SD) mice weighting 250-280 g were imaged on a 3 T MRI system (GE Signa HDX 3.0 T). High-resolution Mn3[Co(CN)6]2@SiO2 nanocube contrast enhanced multi-slice MR images were obtained from each mouse brain using a fast spin-echo T1-weighted MRI sequence (repetition time (TR)/echo time (TE) = 780/19.6 ms, number of exitations (NEX) = 2, echo train length = 2, 0.188 x 0.188 mm2 in plane resolution with a slice thickness of 2 mm and 10 slices), and a fast spin-echo T2-weighted MRI sequence (repetition time (TR)/echo time (TE) = 3000/110 ms, number of exitations (NEX) = 2, echo train length = 2, 0.188 x 0.188 mm2 in plane resolution with a slice thickness of 2 mm and 10 slices).
All the animal experiment were permitted by the Ethical Committee of the experimental animal center of Medical University of Anhui, China. All the animal experiments and feeding were carried out in accordance with the guidelines of the Ethical Committee of the experimental animal center of Medical University of Anhui, China.
CLSM and TPF measurement
HeLa cells were seeded onto sterile, acid-treated 12-mm coverslips in 24-well plates (Corning Glass Works, Corning, NY, USA). Images were taken with a laser scanning microscope (Zeiss L SM 710) using a 63_1.3 numerical aperture PlanApo objective.

Supplementary Material
Supplementary Information
Supporting Information
